

--- page 1 ---
 
 
Using Deep Learning to Predict Plant Growth and Yield in 
Greenhouse Environments 
Bashar Alhnaity1, Simon Pearson2, Georgios Leontidis1 and Stefanos Kollias1 
1School of Computer Science, University of Lincoln, Lincoln, LN6 7TS, UK                                                                                             
2Lincoln Institute for Agri-Food Technology, University of Lincoln, Lincoln, LN6 7TS, UK. 
Abstract 
Effective plant growth and yield prediction is an essential task for greenhouse 
growers and for agriculture in general. Developing models which can effectively model 
growth and yield can help growers improve the environmental control for better 
production, match supply and market demand and lower costs. Recent developments 
in Machine Learning (ML) and, in particular, Deep Learning (DL) can   provide powerful 
new analytical tools. The proposed study utilises ML and DL techniques to predict yield 
and plant growth variation across two different scenarios, tomato yield forecasting and 
Ficus benjamina stem growth, in controlled greenhouse environments.  We deploy a 
new deep recurrent neural network (RNN), using the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) 
neuron model, in the prediction formulations. Both the former yield, growth and stem 
diameter values, as well as the microclimate conditions, are used by the RNN 
architecture to model the targeted growth parameters. A comparative study is 
presented, using ML methods,  such as support vector regression and random forest 
regression, utilising the mean square error criterion, in order to evaluate the 
performance achieved by the different methods. Very promising results, based on data 
that have been obtained from two green houses, in Belgium and the UK, in the 
framework of the EU Interreg SMARTGREEN project (2017-2021), are presented.  
Keywords: Growth, yield rate, tomato, ficus, stem diameter, prediction, deep learning, 
recurrent LSTM neural networks 
INTRODUCTION 
As with ma ny bio -systems, plant growth is a highly complex and dynamic 
environmentally linked system. Therefore, growth and yield modeling is a significant 
scientific challenge . Modeling approaches vary in a number of aspects (including, scale of 
interest, level of  description, integration of environmental stress, etc.). According to 
(Todorovski and Dzeroski, 2006; Atanasova et al., 2008) two basic modeling approaches are 
possible, namely, "knowledge -driven" or "data -driven" modeling. The knowledge driven 
approach relies mainly on existing domain knowledge. In contrast, a data -driven modeling 
approach is capable of formulating a model solely from gathered data without necessarily 
using domain knowledge. 
Data driven models (DDM) include classical Machine Learning tech niques, artifical 
neural networks (Daniel et al., 2008), support vector machines (Pouteau et al., 2012), and 
generalized linear models. Those methods have many desirable characteristics, such as 
imposing fewer restrictions, or assumptions, the ability to a pproximate nonlinear functions, 
strong predictive abilities, and the flexibility to adapt to inputs of a multivariate system 
(Buhmann, 2003). According to Singh et al., 2016 and reviewed by Liakos et al., 2018 Machine 
Learning (ML), linear polarizations, w avelet-based filtering, vegetation indices (NDVI) and 
regression analysis are the most popular techniques used for analyzing agricultural data. 
However and besides the aforementioned techniques, a new methodology which is recently 
gaining momentum is deep learning (DL)(Goodfellow et al., 2016). DL belongs to the machine 


--- page 2 ---
 
 
learning computational field and is similar to ANN. However, DL is about “deeper” neural 
networks that provide a hierarchical representation of the data by means of various 
operations. This allows larger learning capabilities, and thus higher performance and 
precision. A strong advantage of DL is feature learning, i.e., automatic feature extraction from 
raw data, with features from higher levels of the hierarchy being formed by composition of  
lower level features (Goodfellow et al., 2016). DL can solve more complex problems 
particularly well, because of the more complex related models (Pan and Yang, 2010). These 
complex models employed in DL can increase classification accuracy and reduce erro r in 
regression problems, provided there are adequately large data -sets available describing the 
problem.  
Gonzalez-Sanchez et al.( 2019) presented a comparative study of ANN, SVR, M5-prime, 
KNN ML techniques and Multiple Linear Regression for crop yield p rediction in ten crop 
datasets. In their study, Root Mean Square Error (RMS), Root Relative Square Error (RRSE), 
Normalized Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and Correlation Factor (R) were used as accuracy 
metrics to validate the models. Results showed that M5 -Prime achieved the lowest errors 
across the produced crop yield models. The results of that study ranked the techniques from 
the best to the worst, according to RMSE, RRSE, R, and MAE resulting, in the following order: 
M5-Prime, kNN, SVR, ANN and MLR. Anothe r study by (Nair and Yang -Won, 2016) applied 
four ML techniques, SVM, Random Forest (RF), Extremely Randomized Trees (ERT) and Deep 
Learning (DL) to estimate corn yield in Iowa State. Comparisons of the validation statistics 
showed that DL provided more stable results, overcoming the overfitting problem. 
Stem diameter is considered as one of the important parameters describing the growth 
of plants during vegetative growth stage. Also, the variation of stem diameter has widely been 
used to derive proxies for  plant water status and, is therefore applied in optimisation 
strategies for plant -based irrigation scheduling in a wide range of species. Plant stem 
diameter variation (SDV) refers to plant stem periodic shrinkage and recovery movement 
during the day and night, and this periodic variation is related to plant water content and can 
be used as an indicator of the plant water content change. During active vegetative growth 
and development, crop plants rely on the carbohydrate gained from photosynthesis and the  
translocation of photo-assimilates from the site of synthesis to sink organs (Yu et al., 2015). 
The fundamentals of stem diameter variations have been well documented in a substantial 
amount of literature (Vandegehuchet et al., 2014). It has been document ed that SDV is 
sensitive to water and nutrient conditions and is closely related to the responses of crop 
plants to the changes of environmental conditions (Kanai et al., 2008). The stem diameter is 
an important parameter describing the growth of crop plan ts under abiotic stress during 
vegetative growth stage. Therefore, it is important to generate stem diameter growth models 
able to predict the response of SDV to environmental changes and plant growth under 
different conditions. Many studies emphasize the need to critically review and improve SDV 
models for assessment of environmental impact on crop growth (Hinckley and Bruckerhoff, 
2011). SDV daily models have been developed to accurately predict inter-annual variation in 
annual growth in balsam fir (Abies  balsamea L) (Duchesene and Houle, 2011). Inclusion of 
daily data in growth -climate models can improve predictions of the potential growth 
response to climate by identifying particular climatic events that escape to a classical 
dendroclimatic approach (Duchesene and Houle, 2011). However, models for predicting SDV 
and plant growth using environmental variables have so far remained limited. 
Tomato crop growing in greenhouse environment is considered as a dynamic and 
complex system, with few models having bee n studied for it up to now.  In the literature 
TOMGRO and TOMSIM (Jones et al., 1999), (Heuvelink, 1996) are considered as the main 
applicable dynamic growth models. Those models are dependent on physiological processes, 
and they represent biomass partitio ning, crop growth, and yield as a function of several 
climate and physiological parameters. However, due to their limited application to practical 


--- page 3 ---
 
 
settings, their complexity, the difficulty in estimating initial  parameter values and the need 
for calibration and validation in every new environment, growers uptake has been limited.  
The Tompousse model was developed by (Abreu et al., 2000) to predict tomato yield in 
terms of the weight of harvested fruits. The model was developed by examining the 
relationship between environmental parameters in a heated greenhouses in the Southern 
part of France. A linear relationship between flowering rate and fruit growth was the basic 
assumption used in this model.  However, the model performance was poor when tested in 
unheated plastic greenhouses in Portugal. Another tomato yield model was proposed by 
Adams (Adams, 2002), based on a form of graphical simulation tool. The main objective of the 
model was to represent weekly fluctuations of greenhouse tomato yield in terms of fruit size 
and harvest rate. Hourly climate data were used to estimate the rate of growth of leaf truss 
and the flower production. Yield seasonal fluctuations were generally infuenced by  periodic 
variations of solar radiation and air temperature. According to (Qaddoum et al., 2013),  there 
is a large number of tools that can help farmers in making decisions. These can provide yield 
rate prediction, suggest climate control strategies, synchronise crop production with market 
demands.  
A deep learning model is proposed in this paper, which is trained with environmental 
(CO2, humidity, radiation, outside temperature,  inside temperature), as well as, actual yield 
and stem diameter variation measurements and has the ability to produce accurate prediction 
of either ficus stem diameter, or tomato yield problems. The rest of this paper is organized as 
follows. In Section 2, we briefly describe the proposed approach and the utilised datasets. 
Section 3 presents the obtained results, and Section 4 presents conclusions and future work. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Conventional Machine Learning 
One of the main advantages of Machine learning (ML) techniques is that they are 
capable of autonomously solving large non -linear problems using datasets from multiple 
sources. ML enabl es better decision making and informed action in real -world scenarios 
without (or with minimal) human intervention. It provides a powerful and flexible framework 
for data -driven decision making that can be widely used, also being highly applicable in 
agricultural applications. In recent years different ML techniques have been implemented to 
achieve accurate plant growth, yield and production prediction for different crops. As already 
mentioned, the most successful techniques are Artificial Neural Networks, Support Vector 
Regression (SVR), M5 -prime Regression Trees, Random Forests (RF), and K -Nearest 
Neighbors (Chlingaryan et al., 2018). In this paper, SVR and RF models as baseline models to 
predict plant yield and growth are used. 
Support vector regression (SVR) 
Support vector regression (SVR) arises from a nonlinear generalization of the 
Generalized Portrait algorithm developed by Vapnik (Cortes and Vapnik, 1995). It projects 
the input data into a higher dimensional space using a kernel function and separates different 
classes of data using a hyperplane. The trade-off between margin and errors is controlled by 
the regularization parameter c. SVR with radial basis kernel functions(SVRrbf)uses 𝐾(𝑥𝑖,x𝑗) =
exp (−𝑦‖𝑥𝑖 − 𝑥𝑗‖
2
). Here y is a constant used in the radial basis function. 
Random forest (RF) 
RF belongs to the category of ensemble learning algorithms, having been proposed by 
Ho in (Ho, 1998).  As a base learner of the ensemble, RF uses decision trees. The idea of 
ensemble learning is that a single predi ctor is not sufficient for predicting the desired value 
of test data. The reason being that, based on sample data, a single predictor is not able to 


--- page 4 ---
 
 
distinguish between noise and patterns. RF constructs numerous independent regression 
trees, a bootstrap sample of the training data is chosen at each regression tree. Therefore, the 
regression tree continues to grow until it reaches the largest possible size. Whereas, final 
prediction values a weighted average from predicting all regression trees (Breiman 2001).   
Deep learning (DL) 
Deep Learning extends classical ML by adding more "depth" (complexity) into the 
model, as well as transforming the data using various functions that create data 
representations in a hierarchical way, through several levels of abstra ction. A strong 
advantage of DL is feature learning, i.e., automatic feature extraction from raw data, with 
features in higher levels of the hierarchy being formed through composition of lower level 
features. DL can solve complex problems particularly well and fast, due to the more complex 
models used, which also allow massive parallelization. These complex models employed in 
DL can increase classification accuracy, or reduce error in regression problems, provided 
there are adequately large datasets availab le describing the problem. DL includes different 
components, such as convolutions, pooling layers, fully connected layers, gates, memory cells, 
activation functions, encoding/decoding schemes, depending on the network architecture 
used, e.g.,  Convolutiona l Neural Networks, Recurrent Neural Networks, Unsupervised 
Networks (Kamilaris et al., 2018). 
Long short-term memories (LSTM) 
The LSTM model was initial introduced in (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997) with 
the objective of modeling long term dependencies and determining the optimal time lag for 
time series problems. A LSTM network is composed of one input layer, one recurrent hidden 
layer, and one output layer. The basic unit in the hidden layer is the memory block, containing 
memory cells with self -connections memorizing the temporal state and a pair of adaptive, 
multiplicative gating units controlling information flow in the block. The memory cell is 
primarily a recurrently self-connected linear unit, called Constant Error Carousel (CEC), and 
the cell state is represented by the activation of the CEC. The multiplicative gates learn when 
to open and close. By keeping the network error constant, the vanishing gradient problem can 
be solved in LSTM. Moreover, a forget gate is added to the memory cell preventi ng the 
gradient from exploding when learning long time series. The operation and structure of LSTM 
can be described as follows: 
         
        𝑖𝑡=σ(𝑤𝑖𝑥𝑡+U𝑖𝑚𝑡−1+b𝑖) 
 
        𝑠𝑡 = tanh(𝑤𝑠𝑥𝑡+U𝑠𝑚𝑡−1+b𝑠) 
 
        𝑓𝑡 = (𝑤𝑠𝑥𝑡+U𝑠𝑚𝑡−1+b𝑠) 
 
        𝑓𝑡=σ(𝑤𝑓𝑥𝑡+U𝑓𝑚𝑡−1+b𝑓) 
 
        𝑐𝑡=c𝑡−1 ∘ 𝑓𝑡+s𝑡 ∘ 𝑖𝑡 
 
        𝑚𝑡=s𝑡 ∘ 𝑜𝑡                                                                                                                                                (1) 
 
where 𝑖𝑡, 𝑖𝑡and𝑦𝑡are denoted as input gate, forget gate and output gate at time t respectively, 
and𝑚𝑡and 𝑐𝑡represent the hidden state and cell state of the memory cell at time t. 
Microclimatic measurements  
In our first experiment, the DL and ML models were ap plied to Ficus plants (Ficus 