

--- page 1 ---
arXiv:2506.13278v1  [eess.SY]  16 Jun 2025
RL-Guided MPC for
Autonomous Greenhouse Control
Salim Msaad ∗ Murray Harraway ∗ Robert D. McAllister ∗
∗ Delft Center for Systems and Control (DCSC),
Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands
Abstract: The efficient operation of greenhouses is essential for enhancing crop yield while
minimizing energy costs. This paper investigates a control strategy that integrates Reinforce-
ment Learning (RL) and Model Predictive Control (MPC) to optimize economic benefits in
autonomous greenhouses. Previous research has explored the use of RL and MPC for greenhouse
control individually, or by using MPC as the function approximator for the RL agent. This
study introduces the RL-Guided MPC framework, where a RL policy is trained and then
used to construct a terminal cost and terminal region constraint for the MPC optimization
problem. This approach leverages the ability to handle uncertainties of RL with MPC’s online
optimization to improve overall control performance. The RL-Guided MPC framework is
compared with both MPC and RL via numerical simulations. Two scenarios are considered: a
deterministic environment and an uncertain environment. Simulation results demonstrate that,
in both environments, RL-Guided MPC outperforms both RL and MPC with shorter prediction
horizons.
Keywords: Greenhouse Control, Model Predictive Control, Reinforcement Learning, Economic
Optimization
1. INTRODUCTION
The sustainable and efficient operation of greenhouses is
pivotal to modern agriculture, offering a controlled envi-
ronment to maximize crop yield while optimizing resource
efficiency. Modern greenhouse systems demand advanced
control strategies to dynamically manage climatic vari-
ables, such as temperature, humidity, and CO2 levels, with
fluctuating external conditions. Traditional control meth-
ods struggle to balance long-term economic objectives with
real-time operational demands. Reinforcement Learning
(RL) and Model Predictive Control (MPC) have shown
promise in addressing these challenges. Prior research has
explored RL and MPC as standalone solutions for green-
house automation. RL excels in handling stochastic envi-
ronments, while MPC leverages model-based optimization
to enforce constraints and recalibrate actions in real time.
RL approaches for greenhouse control have been studied in
van Laatum et al. (2024) and in Morcego et al. (2023). The
first study presents an open-source RL environment for
greenhouse control, comparing different RL approaches,
while the second study introduces a RL-based controller
that utilizes deep deterministic policy gradient for green-
house climate control, comparing it to a MPC controller.
Boersma et al. (2022) propose a robust MPC controller
for greenhouse climate control, showing improved perfor-
mance over traditional MPC. Mallick et al. (2025) inte-
grate RL and MPC by using MPC as a function approxi-
mator within the RL framework.
The autonomous greenhouse control problem is an eco-
nomic optimization task. Conventional MPC approaches
focus on tracking an economically optimal steady-state for
the system. However, for applications such as greenhouse
control, steady-state tracking is not desirable as optimal
economic operation requires dynamically adjusting the
temperature, humidity, and CO2 levels in the greenhouse.
Economic MPC, which uses economic costs directly in
the stage cost and does not focus on stabilizing a steady-
state target, is therefore more appropriate for greenhouse
control. Nonetheless, a steady-state or reference trajectory
is often used to improve and guarantee performance of eco-
nomic MPC implementations (Amrit et al., 2011; Risbeck
and Rawlings, 2020; Angeli et al., 2012)
This paper presents the RL-Guided MPC framework,
where an RL policy informs the terminal cost and region
constraints in the MPC optimization. The policy is used to
build a cost function approximator for the terminal cost,
while rollouts using the actor define the terminal region
constraint. This integration improves control performance
while ensuring computational efficiency in scenarios with
limited prediction horizons. The efficacy of the proposed
approach is validated through numerical simulations, com-
paring RL-Guided MPC against standalone MPC and RL
controllers. The simulations are conducted in two environ-
ments. One environment is deterministic, while the other
is stochastic with parametric uncertainty.
Section 2 outlines the greenhouse model, simulation envi-
ronments, and the optimization problem tackled by the
RL agent, MPC, and RL-Guided MPC. Section 3 and
Section 4 describe the RL agent and MPC controller,
while Section 5 introduces the RL-Guided MPC frame-
work. Numerical results are presented in Section 6, and
the conclusions are presented in Section 7.


--- page 2 ---
Table 1. Physical meaning of input u, state x, and disturbance d
u1 CO2 injection (mg m−2 s−1) x1 dry weight (kg m−2) d1 solar radiation (W m−2)
u2 ventilation (mm s−1) x2 indoor CO 2 (ppm) d2 outdoor CO 2 (kg m−3)
u3 heating (W m−2) x3 indoor temperature ( ◦C) d3 outdoor temperature ( ◦C)
x4 indoor humidity (%) d4 outdoor humidity (kg m−3)
2. BACKGROUND
2.1 Greenhouse Model
The greenhouse and crop model utilized in this paper is
the same as in Van Henten (1994). The model is discretised
with the fourth order Runge-Kutta method with a sample
period ∆t = 1800 s (30 minutes), resulting in the following
state space model:
x(k + 1) = f(x(k), u(k), d(k), p) (1)
with discrete time k ∈ Z+, state variable x(k) ∈ R4,
control input u(k) ∈ R3 and weather disturbance d(k) ∈
R4. The parameter p ∈ R22 represents all parameters
used in the model. The values and meaning of p and the
nonlinear function f(·) are described in Boersma et al.
(2022). State estimation is not considered in this work. It
is assumed that the state variable x(k) is always known.
Table 1 provides the physical meaning of the state, input,
and disturbance variables.
The weather data for simulations and training was sourced
from the Venlow Greenhouse in Bleiswijk, covering the
period from January 30 to March 11, 2014. The weather
is assumed to be deterministic and known at each time
step. This dataset spans a 40-day growing period with a
time step of 30 minutes, resulting in a total of 1920 time
steps. For the numerical simulations, two scenarios are
considered: a deterministic environment and a stochastic
environment. In a real-world greenhouse, uncertainty is
present in all aspects of the model. Uncertainty may
arise in the weather prediction, measurement noise on the
outputs, and the control inputs may not be exact. As done
in Boersma et al. (2022), the uncertainty in the stochastic
environment is modelled as parametric uncertainty, which
aims to offer a simplified representation of the real-world
uncertainties. It is assumed that the uncertain parameters
ˆp ∈ R22 follow the uniform probability distribution
ˆp ∼ U (p(1 − δ), p(1 + δ)), (2)
where vector p represents the nominal values of the pa-
rameters and δ is a percentage that defines the range of
the distribution. The value of δ is set to 5% for all of
the stochastic simulations presented in Section 6. For each
simulation in the stochastic environment, a new set of
uncertain parameters ˆp is sampled from the distribution
in (2), and the system dynamics in (1), with p = ˆp, are
used for simulation.
2.2 Optimization Problem
Optimal greenhouse control involves maintaining suitable
environmental conditions for crop growth, including tem-
perature, humidity, and CO 2 levels, while minimizing re-
source use. This is achieved through control inputs for
heating using heating pipes, ventilation by controlling
window openings, and CO 2 injection. The goal is to max-
imize crop yield while minimizing resource consumption.
Table 2. Pricing and penalty factors
Symbol Value Unit
c1 1.906 · 10−1 e mg−1
c3 1.281 · 10−1 e J−1
r 20.93* e kg−1
λ2 5 · 10−5 e(ppm m2)−1
λ3 5 · 10−3 e(°C m2)−1
λ4 7 · 10−4 e(% m2)−1
* Corresponding to 1.07 e kg−1 for fresh weight.
Table 3. Input and output constraints and
initial conditions
Symbol Value Symbol Value Symbol Value
umin
1 0 umax
1 1.2 u1(0) 0
umin
2 0 umax
2 7.5 u2(0) 0
umin
3 0 umax
3 150 u3(0) 50
xmin
1 0 xmax
1 ∞ x1(0) 0.0035
xmin
2 500 xmax
2 1600 x2(0) 0.001
xmin
3 10 xmax
3 20 x3(0) 15
xmin
4 0 xmax
4 80% (78%)* x4(0) 0.008
* Constraint tightening of 2% for the stochastic case.
Deciding the harvest time is also an important factor in
profitability. However, in this study, a fixed growing period
of 40 days is chosen instead of including this decision in
the optimization problem. This approach aligns with other
studies in the literature (Boersma et al. (2022); Morcego
et al. (2023); Mallick et al. (2025)). At the conclusion of
this growing period, the crop is harvested and sold, mark-
ing the end of the cultivation cyle. The revenue generated
from the sale is then used to calculate the Economic Profit
Indicator (EP I), which is determined by subtracting the
heating and CO2 costs from the total earnings, as follows:
EP I = r x1(tf) −
tfX
k=0
 
c1u1(k) + c3u3(k)

∆t, (3)
where tf denotes the final time, set at 40 days,c1 represent
the CO 2 injection cost coefficient, c3 the heating cost
coefficient, r the revenue coefficient from lettuce sales, and
∆t the sample period. The values of these pricing factors
are listed in Table 2.
The EP I defines the objective function for the greenhouse
control problem. However, directly optimizing (3) using
MPC or RL is difficult due to the sparse reward structure,
since rewards are given only at the end of the growing
period. To overcome this challenge, the following economic
stage cost is defined for each time step:
ℓe
 
x(k), u(k)

= − r
 
x1(k) − x1(k − 1)

+
 
c1u1(k) + c3u3(k)

∆t. (4)
The cumulative sum of the stage costs in (4) over the
growing period is equivalent to the EP I in (3), but
with the opposite sign. State constraints are essential to
ensure the system operates within realistic and feasible
bounds. Temperature, humidity, and CO 2 concentration


--- page 3 ---
must stay within specified minimum and maximum limits.
However, due to inherent uncertainties, these constraints
cannot be strictly enforced. Instead, they are treated as
soft constraints by incorporating three penalty terms into
the objective function to account for any violations. As a
result, the following stage cost function is defined:
ℓ
 
x(k), u(k)

= ℓe
 
x(k), u(k)

+ g2
 
x2(k)

+ g3
 
x3(k)

+ g4
 
x4(k)

, (5)
where g2, g3, g4 are the penalty functions for the indoor
CO2 concentration, temperature, and humidity, respec-
tively. These penalty functions are defined as
gi
 
xi(k)

=



λi
 
xi(k) − xmax
i

if xi(k) > x max
i ,
λi
 
xmin
i − xi(k)

if xi(k) < x min
i ,
0 otherwise .
(6)
The penalty coefficients λ2, λ3, and λ4 are defined in
Table 2. The state’s minimum and maximum threshold
values xmin
i and xmax
i are defined in Table 3. In addition
to the state constraints, the control inputs are also subject
to constraints. The heating injection, ventilation, and CO2
injection are bounded by their respective minimum and
maximum values, as defined in Table 3. Moreover, the
control inputs are subject to rate constraints to prevent
abrupt changes in the control actions. For each control
input i = {1, 2, 3}, the absolute rate of change is limited
to δumax
i = umax
i /10.
Considering the objective function in (5), along with the
state and rate constraints, the optimal greenhouse control
task is described by the following optimization problem:
min
u(·)
tfX
k=0
ℓ
 
x(k), u(k)

, (7a)
s.t. x(k + 1) = f
 
x(k), u(k), d(k), p

, (7b)
umin ≤ ui(k) ≤ umax, (7c)
|u(k) − u(k − 1)| ≤ δumax. (7d)
The RL agent, MPC and RL-Guided MPC all seek to
solve the optimization problem in (7) and are ultimately
evaluated based on the cumulative cost in (7a). The initial
conditions, detailed in Table 3, were kept constant for
every episode and for both the deterministic and stochastic
cases.
3. REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
Actor-critic methods combine elements of both policy-
based and value-based approaches, enabling stable and
efficient learning. The actor is responsible for learning a
policy, while the critic evaluates the quality of actions
taken. By leveraging this dual structure, actor-critic al-
gorithms allow policies to improve based on both direct
experience and feedback from the critic. One key advan-
tage of actor-critic algorithms is their ability to handle
continuous state and action spaces effectively (Sutton and
Barto (2020)), in contrast to other methods, such as Q-
learning, that are better suited to discrete environments.
This makes them well-suited for complex control tasks,
such as greenhouse climate optimization. The actor-critic
algorithm employed in this study is soft actor-critic (SAC)
(Haarnoja et al. (2018)), a widely used actor-critic algo-
rithm. SAC introduces an entropy term into the reward
function, explicitly balancing exploration and exploitation.
Table 4. Hyperparameters for the RL agent
Parameter Value
Training episodes 100
Warm-up episodes 9
Hidden layers 2
Neurons per hidden layer 128
Batch size 1024
Learning rate 5 · 10−3
Buffer size 100,000
Activation function ReLU
Discount factor γ 0.95
This leads to the learning of a policy πθ(s(k)), function
of the current observation s(k) and parameterized by θ,
where the entropy term determines policy randomness.
By optimizing both the expected cumulative reward and
entropy, the agent encourages diverse action selection.
Careful selection of the agent’s observation space is cru-
cial for effective learning. Providing insufficient informa-
tion may hinder the agent’s ability to learn meaningful
strategies, while excessive information can make it difficult
to extract relevant patterns. In a real-world greenhouse
setting, expert growers do not have direct access to the
current dry weight of the lettuce crop. However, in this
study, it is assumed that this value, denoted by x1(k),
is available to the RL agent, to MPC and to RL-Guided
MPC. The agent also receives data on the greenhouse’s
indoor temperature x2(k), CO 2 concentration x3(k), and
humidity x4(k), which are typically measured by sensors
in real-world greenhouses. Moreover, the previous input
u(k − 1) is included in the observation space. This infor-
mation is crucial, since the difference between the current
and previous control inputs is constrained, by (7d), to
prevent abrupt changes. The weather disturbance d(k) is
also available to the agent, as it is for the MPC and for the
RL-Guided MPC. Finally, the agent is designed to be time-
aware, meaning that the current time step k is explicitly
provided. This allows the agent to make decisions based on
the stage of the growing period. Without this information,
the agent would not be able to distinguish between early
and late stages of the growing period, which is crucial
for effective control. Therefore, the observation space is
defined as:
s(k) =
 
x(k), u(k − 1), d(k), k

. (8)
To ensure that the control input u(k) adheres to the
constraints specified in (7), the agent’s action, denoted as
a(k) = πθ(s(k)) with a ∈ [−1, 1]3, is interpreted as an
adjustment to the previous control input:
u(k) = max
 
umin,
min(umax, u(k − 1) + a(k)δumax)

. (9)
The reward function that the RL agent is trained to
maximize is the same objective function defined in (5)
but with an inverted sign. This formulation ensures that
both methods operate under a consistent optimization
framework, allowing for direct comparisons between all
approaches. The discount factor, γ, is a crucial hyperpa-
rameter. For long-term tasks, γ = 1 allows the agent to
consider the entire growth period and optimize long-term
economic outcomes. However, it can destabilize training.
To address this, we used γ = 0.95, which improved policy
effectiveness. Table 4 lists all RL agent hyperparameters.
Two different RL agents were trained, one for the de-


--- page 4 ---
terministic environment and the other for the stochastic
environment. Both agents were trained using identical
hyperparameters, with the only difference being the envi-
ronment, and consequently, the datasets they were exposed
to during training.
4. MODEL PREDICTIVE CONTROL
The MPC controller in this study is designed to solve the
optimization problem defined in (7). At time step k0, the
following optimization problem is solved:
min
u(k)
k0+NpX
k=k0
ℓ
 
x(k), u(k)

, (10a)
s.t. x(k + 1) = f(x(k), u(k), d(k), p), (10b)
umin ≤ u(k) ≤ umax, (10c)
|u(k) − u(k − 1)| ≤ δumax, (10d)
x(k0) = xk0 , (10e)
where Np is the prediction horizon, and xk0 is the system’s
state at time k0. Once the optimization problem is solved,
the first control input is applied to the system, and the
optimization problem is solved again at the next time step.
This process is repeated at each time step until the end of
the growing period. Moreover, to help with the feasibility
of the optimization problem, the solver is warm-started
with the previous solution. The optimization problem is
solved numerically using the open-source software frame-
work CasADi (Andersson et al. (2019)) and the IPOPT
solver (W¨ achter and Biegler (2006)).
Two different MPC controllers are designed, one for the
deterministic environment and the other for the stochastic
environment. The MPC formulation in (10) is used for
both environments. The only modification for the stochas-
tic case is a tighter indoor humidity constraint xmax
4 , 78%
instead of 80%. This constraint tightening in the MPC for-
mulation reduces the risk of violating the actual constraint
at 80% in the stochastic simulation environment.
5. RL-GUIDED MPC
In the following, we outline the RL-Guided MPC frame-
work, which incorporates the agent trained in Section 3
into the MPC optimization problem of Section 4. First,
we outline how the terminal cost is derived from the critic.
Next, we describe how the actor is utilized to define the
terminal region constraint. Finally, we illustrate how the
actor helps to provide a warm-start initial guess for the
RL-Guided MPC optimization problem.
5.1 Terminal cost
In the RL-Guided MPC framework, the terminal cost is
directly obtained from the actor network of the SAC agent
trained in Section 3. Using the learned policy πθ, multiple
closed-loop trajectories are generated. This data is then
used to train a cost function approximator ˜Jϕ that esti-
mates the expected return for a given state. This approach
enables the RL-Guided MPC to account for long-term
effects over the entire growing period without extending
the prediction horizon.
The cost function approximator is trained through ex-
pected return learning. Given a nominal state trajectory
Table 5. Hyperparameters for the cost function
approximator
Parameter Value
Hidden layers 2
Neurons per hidden layer 128
Batch size 1024
Learning rate 1 · 10−3
Buffer size 1024
Activation function tanh
xn(k), 1000 time steps are uniformly sampled from the
interval {0, 1, . . . , tf }. For each sampled time step k(i), an
initial state x(k(i)) is sampled from a uniform distribution
within a range defined by the nominal trajectory:
x(k(i)) ∼ U
 
xn
min(k(i)), xn
max(k(i))

(11)
where
xn
min(k) = xn(k)(1 − σ),
xn
max(k) = xn(k)(1 + σ). (12)
The parameter σ, set at 50%, determines the spread of the
sampled initial states around the nominal trajectory.
Next, from each sampled state x(k(i)), the respective
agent’s observation s(k(i)), defined in (8), is constructed
and the policy πθ is used to obtain a closed-loop trajectory
that extends until the end of the growing cycle tf. The
cumulative cost of each trajectory is then defined as:
Jπθ(s(k(i))) =
tfX
k=ks
ℓ
 
x(k), πθ(s(k))

. (13)
The cumulative cost of each trajectory is collected together
with its respective dry weight x1(k(i)) and sampled time
k(i) to form dataset D. This dataset is divided into training
and validation sets, with 80% of the data used for training
and 20% for validation. To construct the cost function
approximator ˜Jϕ, a neural network parameterized by ϕ
is trained using the values of x1(k(i)) and k(i) as inputs
and the values of Jπθ(s(k(i))) as targets. The following loss
function is minimized using the Adam optimizer (Kingma
and Ba (2017)):
L(ϕ, D) = 1
Ns
NsX
i=1

˜Jϕ(x1(k(i)), k(i)) − Jπθ(s(k(i)))
2
.
The hyperparameters used for the cost function approxi-
mator are indicated in Table 5.
The cost function approximator is then added as a term to
the objective function of the MPC optimization problem
defined in (10). At each time step k0, the cost function for
the RL-Guided MPC is thus defined as
k0+NpX
k=k0
ℓ
 
x(k), u(k)

+ ˜Jϕ
 
x1(k0 + Np), k0 + Np

. (14)
5.2 Terminal region constraint and initial guess
For the first time step, the terminal region constraint
and the initial guess are constructed using the initial
conditions, defined in Table 3, and the actor’s policy. The
agent’s observation s(0) is constructed using the initial
conditions. Policy πθ is then used to compute the closed-
loop trajectory from the initial time step to Np + 1:
{s(0), s(1), . . . , s(Np + 1)}, (15)