

--- page 1 ---
arXiv:2409.12789v3  [eess.SY]  2 Jan 2025
REINFORCEMENT LEARNING -BASED MODEL PREDICTIVE
CONTROL FOR GREENHOUSE CLIMATE CONTROL
Samuel Mallick*,1, **, Filippo Airaldi1, **, Azita Dabiri1, Congcong Sun2, and Bart De Schutter 1
1Delft Center for Systems and Control, Delft University of Te chnology, 2628 CD Delft, The Netherlands
2Agricultural Biosystems Engineering Group, Wageningen Un iversity, 6700 AA Wageningen, The Netherlands
*Corresponding author, e-Mail: s.h.mallick@tudelft.nl
**These authors contributed equally to this work.
ABSTRACT
Greenhouse climate control is concerned with maximizing pe rformance in terms of crop yield and
resource efﬁciency. One promising approach is model predic tive control (MPC), which leverages a
model of the system to optimize the control inputs, while enf orcing physical constraints. However,
prediction models for greenhouse systems are inherently in accurate due to the complexity of the
real system and the uncertainty in predicted weather proﬁle s. For model-based control approaches
such as MPC, this can degrade performance and lead to constra int violations. Existing approaches
address uncertainty in the prediction model with robust or s tochastic MPC methodology; however,
these necessarily reduce crop yield due to conservatism and often bear higher computational loads.
In contrast, learning-based control approaches, such as re inforcement learning (RL), can handle
uncertainty naturally by leveraging data to improve performance. This work proposes an MPC-based
RL control framework to optimize the climate control perfor mance in the presence of prediction
uncertainty. The approach employs a parametrized MPC schem e that learns directly from data, in an
online fashion, the parametrization of the constraints, pr ediction model, and optimization cost that
minimizes constraint violations and maximizes climate con trol performance. Simulations show that
the approach can learn an MPC controller that signiﬁcantly o utperforms the current state-of-the-art
in terms of constraint violations and efﬁcient crop growth.
Keywords Greenhouse Climate Control·Model Predictive Control·Reinforcement Learning
1 Introduction
Greenhouse climate control presents a key opportunity to
address the growing world population’s food production
requirements in a changing climate, and the grand soci-
etal challenge of efﬁcient energy consumption. With mod-
ern greenhouses equipped with actuation systems such
as heating, ventilation, and CO 2 injection, effective con-
trol approaches can lead to high crop yield in an energy-
efﬁcient manner. However, the control challenge is difﬁ-
cult as the process dynamics are highly nonlinear and com-
plex [28], and the climate variables, such as temperature
and humidity, must be effectively constrained to avoid
damage to crops due to, e.g., spread of diseases [6, 34, 11].
While traditional methods, e.g., on-off and PID control,
have been used for low-level regulation, these strategies
are not rooted in optimal control and are in general un-
able to deliver optimal performance and to systematically
handle complex state and/or input constraints [12, 15].
Model predictive control (MPC) is an optimization-based
control methodology that naturally handles multi-input-
multi-output systems with state, input, and output con-
straints [5]. It has seen huge theoretical success and appli -
cation in process control, and has been proposed to solve
greenhouse control challenges [3, 10, 21]. However, MPC
relies heavily on an accurate prediction model, while in a
greenhouse prediction model there always exist uncertain-
ties due to, e.g., modeling error and inaccurate weather
forecasting. For model-based control, an incorrect model
can lead the controller to drive the system to an undesired
point of operation, possibly violating constraints. Furth er-
more, as constraints often represent the validity range for
the accuracy of the prediction model, violations of the con-


--- page 2 ---
S. Mallick et al.
straints can lead to degraded performance when applied to
the real system [34].
Some existing works have addressed prediction uncer-
tainty only in the context of external disturbances, such
as weather predictions [6, 14]. In [8], the uncertainty in
market prices is addressed with a scenario-based stochas-
tic MPC controller; however, the controller is based on
mixed-integer optimization, requiring signiﬁcant compu-
tational efforts. Alternatively, the following existing
works have explored uncertainty stemming from an incor-
rect physical model of the system. In [12], the robustness
of predictive control for a greenhouse in the presence of
model uncertainties is considered empirically, however no
mechanism to compensate for the prediction error is intro-
duced. In [19, 20], a neural network is used as a prediction
model, with a robust MPC controller addressing the pre-
diction uncertainty; however, a min-max robust MPC ap-
proach is used, which is inherently conservative. In [34],
an approach to mitigating the negative effects of model un-
certainty is presented using online parameter estimation.
However, only a small subset of the (possibly) uncertain
model parameters are estimated. Of particular note, in
[4], parametric uncertainty in all model parameters is ad-
dressed. A robust sample-based MPC controller is pro-
posed to incorporate the uncertainty into the control ap-
proach. However, the resulting control scheme is unable
to adequately reduce constraint violations, and results in
less crop yield due to conservativeness. More recently,
[27] has proposed a chance-constrained stochastic MPC
formulation to address parametric uncertainties in green-
house production systems. However, this approach relies
on linearization of the prediction model, further increas-
ing prediction uncertainty. Additionally, the chance con-
strained formulation leads to a computational load that is
higher than traditional MPC schemes.
In contrast to MPC, reinforcement learning (RL) is a
model-free control methodology where a control policy is
learned from data observed from the system [26]. RL con-
trollers naturally handle uncertainty and adapt to chang-
ing conditions with no additional mechanisms, as they
are learned through direct interaction with the real system .
For complex systems with large continuous state and ac-
tion spaces, the state-of-the-art for RL uses deep neural
networks (DNNs) as function approximators to represent
the controller. With the power of DNNs as general func-
tion approximators, this idea has seen unprecedented suc-
cess on previously unsolved problems, e.g., the games of
chess and Go [25]. The power and inherent uncertainty
handling of RL has been identiﬁed as useful for green-
house climate control, with [32] proposing a DNN-based
RL approach based on deep deterministic policy gradient
(DDPG) [17], and [22] drawing a comparison between
MPC and DDPG. However, an inherent drawback for RL
controllers is the absence of theoretical guarantees on the
satisfaction of constraints and a lack of interpretability
due to the black-box DNN function approximation. In the
context of greenhouse control, this means growers have
no guarantee that the automated controller will effectivel y
RL Agent
Environment
Parametric MPC
state
parameters
cost
action
Figure 1: Diagram of the MPC-based RL architecture
constrain climate variables to safe ranges, with potential
negative implications on crop health and proﬁt.
Recently, [9] proposed and justiﬁed an integrated MPC
and RL control paradigm, where the MPC controller
serves as a function approximator for the optimal policy in
model-based RL. Figure 1 depicts a schematic overview
of this architecture. In such a scheme, the MPC con-
troller’s optimization problem acts both as policy provide r,
picking actions based on a state, and value function ap-
proximator, estimating ‘how good’ it is to be in a given
state. The learning algorithm, e.g., Q-learning [33], is
tasked with adjusting the parametrization of the MPC con-
troller in an effort to discover the optimal control policy,
thus improving closed-loop performance in a data-driven
fashion. In this way, despite the presence of mismatches
between the prediction model and the real system, the
MPC control scheme is able to learn and deliver, at con-
vergence, the optimal policy and value functions of the un-
derlying RL task, granted the MPC parametrization is rich
enough. In contrast to DNN-based RL, the MPC scheme
at the core of this approach provides the option of integrat-
ing prior information that may be known on the system in
the form of, e.g., an expert-based, possibly imperfect, pre -
diction model. Moreover, MPC-based agents are in gen-
eral more amenable to analysis and certiﬁcation in terms
of stability and constraint satisfaction [5]. Finally, MPC -
based controllers can take constraints into account in an
explicit and structured way, which DNNs are generally in-
capable of doing. The above beneﬁts render this method-
ology suitable for greenhouse climate control, where an
inaccurate prediction model is known, and climate vari-
ables must be constrained.
Therefore, in this work we propose an integrated MPC and
RL framework to address the problem of greenhouse cli-
mate control under parametric uncertainty stemming from
uncertain weather predictions and modeling mismatches.
Speciﬁcally:
1. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, a com-
bined MPC and RL approach for greenhouse cli-
mate control in the presence of uncertainty is pro-
posed for the ﬁrst time. A parametrized MPC
scheme, inspired by [9], is crafted to serve as
policy provider and value function approximator
2


--- page 3 ---
S. Mallick et al.
in an RL formulation of the greenhouse climate
control problem. A second-order Q-learning al-
gorithm is leveraged to adjust the parametriza-
tion of the MPC scheme online, automatically
learning a control policy. The approach pro-
vides an adaptive and high-performing climate
controller that minimizes potentially dangerous
constraint violations, without negatively affect-
ing crop growth due to robustness conservatism,
and without relying on an expensive-to-acquire
accurate prediction model. Additionally, in con-
trast to DNN-based learning approaches, the be-
havior of the resulting controller can be inter-
preted by analyzing the learned parametrization
of the constraints, prediction model, and cost
function.
2. The approach is then validated in simulation, and
compared against both model-based MPC and
model-free RL state-of-the-art controllers. The
results demonstrate the effectiveness of the ap-
proach, with the proposed methodology outper-
forming existing controllers from the literature
in both constraint satisfaction and efﬁcient crop
growth.
Compared to the state-of-the-art MPC formulations [4,
8, 19, 20, 27], instead of addressing uncertainty in the
parametrization in a robust or stochastic fashion, the pro-
posed methodology adapts its policy via RL in order to
improve closed-loop performance. This has the distinct
advantage of yielding less conservative control schemes
while retaining low computational complexity. In compar-
ison with DNN-based approaches such as [22, 32], our
method integrates MPC as function approximator in the
RL algorithm, fostering a model-based approach that is
more suitable for learning high-performance, constraint-
abiding policies.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 relevant
background is provided on the greenhouse model used,
and on the combined MPC and RL paradigm from [9].
The problem we address is formally deﬁned in Section
3. Section 4 presents the proposed methodology, which
is then applied and assessed extensively in simulation in
Section 5. Finally, conclusions and future work directions
are given in Section 6.
2 Background
This section describes the greenhouse model considered
in this work. Additionally, background theory on combin-
ing MPC and RL is provided, upon which the methodol-
ogy proposed in this paper is built.
2.1 Lettuce Greenhouse Model
We consider a greenhouse for lettuce growing, with the
continuous-time model, presented in [28], given in the Ap-
pendix. While the continuous-time model is used in all
simulations, for control purposes a discrete-time model is
considered
x(k + 1) = f
(
x(k), u(k), d(k), p
)
,
y(k) = g
(
x(k), p
)
, (1)
with x∈ R4 the state, u∈ R3 the control input, d∈ R4
the weather disturbance, and y ∈ R4 the output. Fur-
thermore, p ∈ R28 is a set of model parameters, and
k∈ Z+ is the discrete-time counter for discrete time steps
of ∆t = 900 s (15 minutes). The nonlinear functions f
and g, and the model parameters p, are given in the Ap-
pendix. The physical meaning of the states, outputs, in-
puts, and disturbances is summarized in Table 1. Estima-
tion is out the scope of this paper, and it is assumed, as in
[4], that at each time step k a perfect estimate of the state
x(k) is available.
2.2 MPC as a function approximator in RL
Consider discrete-time system dynamics as a Markov De-
cision Process (MDP) [26] with continuous state s∈ Rn,
continuous action a∈ Rm, and state transitions s, a→ s+
with the underlying conditional probability density
P[s+|s, a] : Rn× Rm× Rn→ [0, 1]. (2)
Consider a deterministic policy πθ (s) : Rn → Rm
parametrized by θ∈ Rl. Selecting actions based on this
policy will cause the system to visit the MDP’s states with
a given distribution, denoted ηπ θ . The performance of
such a policy is deﬁned as [26]
J(πθ ) = Eη πθ
[ Ns∑
k=0
γkL
(
sk, πθ
(
sk
) ) ]
, (3)
where sk is the state at time step k, L(s, a) : Rn× Rm→
R the stage cost, γ∈ (0, 1] the discount factor, and Ns the
number of time steps considered in a task. The RL task is
then to ﬁnd the optimal policy π⋆
θ as
π⋆
θ = arg min
θ
J(πθ ). (4)
The familiar notions of state- and action-value functions
[26] are deﬁned respectively as
Qθ
(
sk, ak
)
= L
(
sk, ak
)
+ Eη πθ
[ Ns∑
τ =k+1
γτ − kL
(
sk, πθ
(
sk
) ) ]
, (5)
and Vθ
(
sk
)
= Qθ
(
sk, πθ
(
sk
) )
. While DNNs are the
most common choice for representing the policy and value
functions [17], their black-box nature does not facilitate
the injection of prior information, e.g., approximate pre-
diction models, nor is it conducive to an interpretabile pol -
icy and the addition of constraints. To account for these
drawbacks, [9] proposed the use of an MPC scheme in
place of a DNN.
3


--- page 4 ---
S. Mallick et al.
Table 1: Physical meaning of the state x, output y, input u, and disturbance d.
x1 dry-weight (kg m− 2) y1 dry-weight (g m− 2) d1 radiation (W m− 2)
x2 indoor CO2 (kg m− 3) y2 indoor CO2 (‰) d2 outdoor CO2 (kg m− 3)
x3 indoor temperature ( ◦ C) y3 indoor temperature ( ◦C) d3 outdoor temperature ( ◦ C)
x4 indoor humidity ( kg m− 3) y4 indoor humidity ( %) d4 outdoor humidity ( kg m− 3)
u1 CO2 injection (mg m− 2 s− 1) u2 ventilation (mm s− 1) u3 heating (W m− 2)
Consider the following MPC problem approximating the
value function, parametrized by θ, Vθ : Rn→ R as
Vθ (s) = minx, u, σ λθ
(
x(0)
)
+
N − 1∑
k=0
γk
(
Lθ
(
x(k), u(k)
)
+ ω⊤ σ(k)
)
+ γN
(
V f
θ
(
x(N )
)
+ w⊤
f σ(N )
)
(6a)
s.t. x (0) = s, (6b)
for k = 0, . . . , N− 1
x(k + 1) = fθ
(
x(k), u(k)
)
, (6c)
hθ
(
x(k), u(k)
)
≤ σ(k), (6d)
σ(k)≥ 0, (6e)
hf
θ
(
x(N )
)
≤ σ(N ), (6f)
σ(N )≥ 0, (6g)
where slack variable σ(k) softens the inequality constraint
for time step k, and the vectors x, u and σ respectively col-
lect the states, actions, and slack variables over the hori-
zon N . Problem (6) is solved numerically online to gen-
erate the value Vθ (s). In (6), λθ is an initial cost term,
Lθ is the stage cost, and V f
θ is a terminal cost approxi-
mation, all of which are parametrized by θ. Furthermore,
fθ is the model approximation, and hθ , hf
θ are inequality
constraints. Lastly, w and wf are the weights of the slack
variable in the objective. Note that the formulation (6) is
general, i.e., the dimension of θ, and how it enters into the
respective functions in (6), is not made explicit. In Sec-
tion 4 we will introduce a concrete realization, designed
for the greenhouse climate control problem.
Given (6), the action value function Qθ and the policy πθ ,
satisfying the fundamental equalities of the Bellman equa-
tions [9], are deﬁned as follows:
Qθ(s, a) = minx, u, σ (6a)
s.t. (6b)− (6g),
u(0) = a,
(7)
πθ (s) = arg mina Qθ (s, a). (8)
Therefore, in RL terms, the parametric MPC scheme acts
as policy provider for the learning agent, whose goal is
to modify the parameters θ of the controller in order to
minimize (4). V arious forms of RL [26] exist that solve
this problem directly or indirectly via iterative updates
θ← θ− α∇ θ
m∑
i=1
ψ(si, ai, si+1, θ), (9)
where α∈ R+ is the learning rate, z denotes the number
of observations used in the update (i.e., a batch of obser-
vations), and ψ captures the controller’s performance and
varies with the speciﬁc algorithm. For example, in recur-
sive Q-learning we have that m = 1 and ψ = δ2
i , where
the temporal-difference (TD) error
δi = L(si, ai) + γVθ(si+1)− Qθ(si, ai) (10)
captures the estimation error of the value functions [26].
3 Problem Formulation
We address the problem of optimal greenhouse climate
control for crop yield and resource efﬁciency. As in [4],
we consider the predictive uncertainty, stemming from un-
certain weather predictions and modeling errors, to be cap-
tured by parametric uncertainty 1 in the model parameters
p. Speciﬁcally, the true values for p are assumed to be
unknown.
Growth cycles of 40 days are considered, where control
inputs are computed at 15 minute time steps, i.e., growth
cycles of Ns = 3840 time steps. This duration is in line
with the literature [4, 22], and represents a standard lettuce
growth cycle, at the end of which the lettuce is harvested
and sold, generating economic proﬁt. During each growth
cycle, we wish to maximize the yield and minimize the vi-
olations of constraints on the system outputs, whilst min-
imizing the cost associated with control signals. The sys-
tem outputs are constrained as ymin(k)≤ y(k)≤ ymax(k),
with [4, 22]
ymin(k) =
(
0, 0, y3, min
(
d1(k)
)
, 0
) ⊤
,
ymax(k) =
(
∞ , 1.6, y3, max
(
d1(k)
)
, 70
) ⊤
,
(11)
1The choice to represent modeling error and weather predic-
tion inaccuracy via the uncertainty in p results in a prediction
model in which even the parameters that may represent known
physical quantities, e.g., the ideal gas constant p23, being un-
known.
4