

--- page 1 ---
Energy optimization and plant 
comfort management in smart 
greenhouses using the artificial bee 
colony algorithm
Muhammad Jawad1, Fazli Wahid1,2,3, Sikandar Ali1, Yingliang Ma3, Ahmed Alkhyyat4,5,6, 
Jawad Khan7 & Youngmoon Lee8
Agriculture is an essential component of human sustenance in this world. These days, with a growing 
population, we must significantly increase agricultural productivity to meet demand. Agriculture moved 
toward technologies as a result of the demand for higher yields with less resources. Increasing awareness 
of the significance and influence of agricultural practices in global climate change has made the use of 
energy-efficient innovations a vital aspect of the agriculture sector. The use of greenhouses to provide 
controlled environments that encourage effective plant growth is one of the current associated approaches. 
If not properly maintained, the energy used to run the greenhouses’ chillers, heaters, humidifiers, carbon 
dioxide (CO₂) generators, and carbon emissions becomes expensive. The goal of this research is to create 
a sustainable greenhouse model while achieving the best plant growth requirements with minimal use of 
energy. In order to achieve the lowest possible amount of energy consumption, the optimization model 
considered temperature, humidity, CO₂ levels, and sunlight as essential parameters in the environment. The 
Artificial Bee Colony (ABC) optimization technique was utilized for setting the environmental parameters 
for plant growth, considered for the suggested system. The system’s inputs were plant-preferred factors, 
and plant comfort was achieved by applying ABC to boost the parameters’ efficiency. A fuzzy controller 
was utilized to regulate different devices, including humidifiers, heaters, chillers, and CO₂ generators, by 
entering the introduced values. The overall efficacy of the fuzzy controllers that switch On/Off the actuators 
was obtained by minimizing the error between the best estimates of environmental factors and the ABC 
optimized values. Additionally, the suggested method was contrasted with other effective algorithms, 
such as Genetic Algorithm (GA), Firefly Algorithm (FA), and Ant Colony Optimization (ACO). Based on the 
results of the comparison analysis between the ABC algorithm and current practices, present procedures do 
not minimize the fluctuations in the inaccuracy between the target and actual environmental parameters, 
which is a necessary step towards increasing energy efficiency. The suggested method used 162.19 kWh 
for temperature control, 84.65405 kWh for Humidity, 131.2013 kWh for Sunlight, and 603.55208 kWh 
for CO₂ management, indicating the maximum energy efficiency. ACO needed 172.2621 kWh, 88.269 
kWh, 175.7127 kWh, and 713.2125 kWh, in contrast to FA 169.7983 kWh, 86.04496 kWh, 155.8442 kWh, 
and 743.7986 kWh. Temperature, Humidity, Sunlight, and CO₂ were measured by GA at 164.1609 kWh, 
86.19566 kWh, 174.6429 kWh, and 734.9514 kWh, respectively. In terms of Plant comfort, the suggested 
approach also outperformed 0.986770848 ACO (0.944043), FA (0.949832), and GA (0.946076). It is 
important to note that the research being done has the potential to minimize operating costs and maximize 
the amount of energy needed for plant growth, thereby creating a model for sustainable greenhouse 
agriculture.
Keywords Plant’s preferred environment, Greenhouse environment, Energy consumption, Optimization, 
Smart greenhouse, Fuzzy logic
1Department of Information Technology, The University of Haripur, Haripur 22620, Pakistan. 2College of Science 
and Engineering, School of Computing, University of Derby, Derby DE22 3AW, UK. 3School of Computing Sciences, 
University of East Anglia, Norwich NR4 7TJ, UK. 4College of Technical Engineering, The Islamic University, Najaf 
54001, Iraq. 5College of Technical Engineering, Islamic University of Diwaniya, Al Diwaniyah 58001, Iraq. 6College 
of Technical Engineering, The Islamic University of Babylon, Babylon 512002, Iraq. 7School of Computing, Gachon 
OPEN
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1752 1| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-84141-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports



--- page 2 ---
University, Seongnam 13120, Republic of Korea. 8Department of Robotics, Hanyang University, Ansan 15588, 
Republic of Korea. email: jkhanbk1@gachon.ac.kr; youngmoonlee@hanyang.ac.kr
Agriculture plays a key factor in ensuring food security, stability, and strengthening the economy of countries. 
It has to fulfill a growing number of environmental and quality regulations. Integrating new technologies in 
the agro-alimentary sector may help meet these challenges 1. Worldwide, access to sustainable food and energy 
sources is a major challenge 2. As a method of intensive and sustainable food production, greenhouse farming 
has the potential to feed the globe3. Promoting the extensive use of greenhouses in farming could be one way to 
overcome the obstacles in the way of the transition to sustainable and precision farming practices. A sustainable 
smart approach could help minimize the effects of climate change, conserve energy and water resources, 
improve quality of life, mitigate environmental problems, and produce local socioeconomic and environmental 
benefits4. A greenhouse’s primary goal is to create the ideal atmosphere for growing crops5. The roof and walls 
of a greenhouse are often constructed from transparent materials like glass or plastic. Plants are cultivated in a 
controlled environment in greenhouses, where moisture levels, soil nutrients, light levels, temperature, etc. are 
all regulated. Thus, by creating optimal environmental conditions, greenhouse technology enables humans to 
grow plants at any time6.
The greenhouse sector has recently gained a lot of attention and has grown rapidly all around the world. Fresh 
vegetable production may be done all year long in greenhouses, which have a production rate that is about 50% 
higher than open-air farming. However, greenhouse production costs are primarily driven by labor and energy 
costs, which together account for more than 50% of total costs. So even a small performance boost can result 
in substantial cost savings. Numerous production systems have been developed for the production of food that 
is entirely natural for humans and leaves the fewest traces of microorganisms and diseases 7. To maintain the 
environment while handling the resources in a greenhouse, skilled farmers are required. Because professional 
cultivators are exceedingly hard to locate and command high pay, hiring them takes time and money. Therefore, 
an IoT-based system must be created that can facilitate the first and enable continuous greenhouse environment 
monitoring. By keeping track of several essential indicators, such as temperature, humidity, CO2 level, etc., the 
system may obtain results from producing crops and cultivating a productive greenhouse environment for plant 
growth8. Utilizing resources as efficiently as possible lowers costs, therefore agriculture machinery should only be 
utilized when truly necessary. The system can assist in gathering data related to farms for a long-term assessment 
and accurate decision-making to maximize profit and use resources efficiently. Furthermore, it improves the 
efficiency of the farmer’s labor by keeping him informed through prompt messages, reminders, and alarms9. The 
approach significantly lowers the expense of hiring professional farmers by empowering the average farmer to 
properly run and maintain the farm with little to no training10.
In the paper, we explain the optimization approach through ABC regarding the means to automate the key 
greenhouse environmental operations automatically. The proposed approach is set with the aim of providing 
optimal interior climate conditions to maximize plant productivity and resource efficiency. Therefore, our 
optimization framework is pursued in detail through mathematical modeling while tested with rigorous 
experimentation. The proposed method dynamically balances the key greenhouse parameters, especially 
temperature, CO₂ concentration, sunlight, and humidity while minimizing energy usage for efficient and 
sustainable greenhouse management. The main goals of this work are to minimize energy costs with comfortable 
conditions for plant growth, to identify and integrate the parameters necessary for control of greenhouse 
environmental conditions, and to design an intuitive yet efficient optimization algorithm that achieves efficacy 
in energy efficiency and comfort for the plants. The contributions go in three aspects: the development of a 
complete energy-efficient optimization model, validation of the case by comparisons with other metaheuristics, 
such as ACO, FA, and GA, and laying down a basis for potential applications in real-world scenarios regarding 
sustainable greenhouse operations.
To the best of our knowledge, no optimization algorithms have been used to optimize energy use in smart 
greenhouse systems, despite a thorough investigation of these algorithms in various fields. The algorithms ABC, 
ACO, FA, and GA are introduced to such a situation in this study. Among the algorithms tested above, ABC 
outperformed ACO, FA, and GA in terms of efficiency and had the greatest results in terms of plant comfort 
and energy savings. In addition to having a high plant comfort index, the ABC used the least amount of energy 
of any significant greenhouse parameter when temperature, humidity, sunshine, and CO2 were managed 
optimally. Therefore, this work has set a standard for the future by highlighting the ABC algorithm’s potential as 
an innovative and effective technique for maximizing energy utilization in smart greenhouses.
The remaining papers are structured as follows. A thorough overview of the literature review and associated 
work is provided in Sect. 2, the suggested work is presented in Sect. 3, the implementation and experimental 
findings are shown in Sect. 4, and a thorough discussion is provided in Sect. 4. Section 5 concludes the paper. 
The abbreviations and descriptions used in this study are listed in Table 1
Related work
Different authors have applied IoT in various domains considering parameters according to their specific 
problems and factors that influence the System’s operation. In this section, several remarkable applications of IoT 
in different contexts are shown. To forecast a smart building’s interior temperature, the authors in11 suggested 
integrating IoT and machine learning algorithms. Also, IoT architecture is employed to deliver standardized, 
interoperable, portable, and safe solutions for forecasting energy usage in smart buildings. The prediction of 
interior temperature, where variables handle values in several quantities, is the primary focus of this article. It 
uses meteorological factors such as sun radiation, ambient temperature, and wind speed that have developed 
over time. Using a time series solution with the help of various well-known machine learning techniques, such 
as Support Vector Machine (SVM), Random Forest, and Neural Networks, allows us to predict the temperature 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1752 2| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-84141-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


--- page 3 ---
of the conditioned space. In another study, the authors in12 addressed interior environment management using 
IoT-based smart building technology which seeks to supply the following key features: checking concerning the 
environmental conditions in the area, identification of the room’s occupants, a cloud-based system where virtual 
mega entities use machine learning techniques to do data analysis jobs, and digital entities gather the information 
produced by the sensors. The Raspberry was equipped with a light neural network, which allowed it to determine 
how many people were in the room based on measurements taken by the sensors and photos taken by the 
camera. Based on environmental criteria, a bagging tree is used for population estimation and classification. 
Gaussian process regression provides a Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.939 since it forecasts the total volatile 
organic compounds (TVOCs) with the number of occupants based on environmental conditions. The article’s 
primary goal is to forecast energy use and enhance energy management in commercial smart buildings, aiming 
for improved efficiency. For prediction, k-NN (k-nearest neighbor) is employed. The technique will forecast the 
peak load based on the amount of electricity used, expressed in kilowatts. Current and voltage comprise the 
highest demand feature used in the k-NN algorithm 13. The control of smart building ventilation subsystems is 
the goal of the paper’s discussion and demonstration of a black-box modeling application realized using data 
mining techniques. Two steps form the foundation of the data processing and learning framework: Raw data 
streams are compressed using the symbolic aggregate approximation approach, and the resulting section is 
inserted into the support vector machine algorithm14.
A Personalized comfort technique is presented in 15 to forecast occupants’ thermal comfort in terms of 
temperature. Four stages make up the suggested method: gathering data, preparing it, extracting features, 
choosing features, balancing the data, and predicting thermal sensing using machine learning and deep learning 
in uncomfortably warm, impartial, and cold climate zones using a combination of logistic regression (LG), 
random forest (RF), Hoeffding Decision Tree (HDT), and deep artificial neural network (DANN). The authors 
in16 suggest the use of intelligent irrigation systems to forecast a crop’s water needs. This system includes sensors 
for temperature, humidity, and moisture that are placed in a field of crops and transmit data via a microprocessor 
to create an Internet of Things (IoT) device with the cloud. Data in real-time collected from the surroundings is 
used to anticipate outcomes effectively results are predicted by the decision tree algorithm and sent to the farmer. 
To identify pests, the authors in 17, combine environmental sensors, artificial intelligence (AI), the Internet of 
Things (IoT), and picture recognition technology. Using the YOLOv3 (Y ou Only Look Once) series, a neural 
network approach was utilized to locate insects using image identification and to predict their appearance using 
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) analysis of environmental data from weather stations. The article gives 
Abbreviation Description
TNP Total Number of Parameters
UpBdi Upper Bound of Parameters i
LowBdi Lower Bound of Parameters i
Rng Range
CS Size of Colony
Max C Maximum Cycles
CI Comfort Index
Tu Plant Preferred Temperature
Cu Plant Preferred Carbon Dioxide
Hu Plant Preferred Humidity
Su Plant Preferred Sunlight
err1 Error Difference between Environmental Temperature and Plant-Preferred Temperature
err2 Error Difference between Environmental Carbon Dioxide and Plant Preferred Carbon Dioxide
err3 Error Difference between Environmental Sunlight and Plant Preferred Sunlight
err4 Error Difference between Environmental Humidity and Preferred Humidity
Prr1 Preference Parameter for Temperature
Prr2 Preference Parameter for Carbon Dioxide
Prr3 Preference Parameter for Sunlight
Prr4 Preference Parameter for Humidity
TRp Total Required Power
RP1 Power Required for Temperature
RP2 Power Required for Sunlight
RP3 Power Required for Carbon Dioxide
RP4 Power Required for Humidity
ABC Artificial Bee Colony
ACO Ant Colony Optimization
FA Firefly Algorithm
GA Genetic Algorithm
Table 1. Abbreviation and their description.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1752 3| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-84141-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


--- page 4 ---
farmers the information they need to precisely apply pesticides at the right time and place, reducing the number 
of agricultural workers needed for effective pest management and attaining the objective of smart agriculture. 
Utilizing predictive computational intelligence approaches, wheat crop nitrogen status is assessed. Analysis of 
crop photographs that were taken in the field under various lighting conditions will be used to determine the 
evaluation. The wheat crop is first exposed to the HSI color normalization procedure, which is followed by crop 
precision status categorization utilizing genetic algorithms (GA) and artificial neural networks (ANN) based 
prediction. By categorizing the crop yield age into groups, an ANN-based optimized technique can effectively 
distinguish wheat crops from other undesirable plants and weeds 18. The emerging Internet of Things (IoT) 
environment generates large volumes of unstructured multimedia data. To remove important data derived 
through the continuously created data, deep learning (DL) techniques are being applied. Because of their low 
processing power, DL approaches are difficult to integrate with Internet of Things devices. Even so, this problem 
is addressed with cloud computing, it also contains some drawbacks like service delays and congestion on the 
network. This paper suggests a way for distributing a part of the DL layers for the fog nodes in an intelligent 
agriculture system on fog computing. With consideration for each fog node’s available processing power and 
bandwidth, the best layers of the DL model are selected for each fog node using the suggested deep learning 
entrusted to fog nodes (DLEFN) approach. A DL framework with modularity and swift speed named Caffe 
(convolutional architecture for fast feature embedding) is initially employed for the project 19. The authors in20 
anticipate the recommendation of an IoT-based intelligent irrigation architecture that uses machine learning 
to estimate soil moisture, leading to a clearer outcome. This research suggests a special EDGE-Fog-IoT-Cloud 
platform for an IoT-based sustainable agricultural design. This framework aims to provide an example of how 
AI methods can help in making informed irrigation decisions for agriculture that improve water efficiency. 
Because the Internet of Things (IoT) devices in a smart city network are linked to sensors that are connected 
to large cloud servers, they are susceptible to threats and malicious assaults. It is crucial to devise methods to 
thwart these assaults and keep IoT devices from malfunctioning. In this paper, the authors evaluate an attack and 
anomaly detection method using machine learning algorithms (LR, SVM, DT, RF , ANN, and KNN) to reduce 
IoT cybersecurity risks in a smart city. Unlike previous works that focused on single classifiers, the research 
also explores ensemble methods, such as bagging, boosting, and stacking, to increase the detection system’s 
performance. Moreover, consider including multiclass classification, cross-validation, and feature selection for 
the topic at hand21.
IoT-based smart brain bleeding detection system is debated and uses machine learning methods. It is extremely 
difficult to detect brain bleeding automatically, which typically results in death or permanent abnormalities. 
To reduce the likelihood of injuries or lifelong disabilities and to provide high-quality medication right to the 
patient’s door, this research has created an intelligent Internet of Things application that can accurately identify 
brain hemorrhage. This Internet of Things application uses a feedforward neural network and support vector 
machine to identify the various kinds of brain hemorrhages 22. A Machine Learning Approach to Modelling 
an Intelligent Ecosystem (IEML) is created in23 to evaluate ecosystem performance intelligently and effectively 
using machine learning techniques. This study describes a smart city that uses ANN techniques to predict the 
ecosystem instantly. Using the cloud and the Internet of Things, the structure is created to make it easier to store, 
index, and visualize the data that a smart city’s input parameters create. To create a predictive and intelligent 
ecosystem model, using a suggested ANN-based method, the Scaled Conjugate Gradient (SCG), Levenberg–
Marquardt (LM), and Bayesian Regularization (BR) algorithms are employed. To diagnose COVID-19 patients 
in smart hospitals, an approach that utilizes machine learning (ML) and the Internet of Things (IoT) is presented 
in24. In this sense, it was highlighted to show how useful IoT technology and machine learning models work in 
smart healthcare settings. It is possible to improve the diagnostic (classification) accuracy based on laboratory 
data by utilizing basic machine learning models. Three machine learning (ML) models—Naive Bayes (NB), 
Random Forest (RF), and Support Vector Machine (SVM)—were developed and evaluated using lab datasets. 
Diagnostic decisions can be supported by the suggested method, which is based on ML and IoT. Additionally, 
the results may decrease the workload for medical professionals, address the issue of patient congestion, and 
lower the COVID-19 pandemic fatality rate. An anomaly detection system, or "ADS," is suggested in 25 for 
smart hospital infrastructures. It has two modules: IDC for identifying network anomalies and threats (the 
SVM method is used to classify the received data), and EDC for identifying e-health-related events (SVM is 
used to find the events of interest, just like IDC). IDC and EDC interact well in a single, integrated system, 
making administration simple and reducing the cost of system management. The events that EDC detects 
are carefully analyzed and are no longer trusted after IDC indicates an intrusion. For hospital infrastructures 
to avoid providing inaccurate signals or making poor decisions about patients’ healthcare, such reliability is 
necessary. Crop production in greenhouses is now a well-established method, and automation in many areas of 
this system is now possible due to advancements in technology. Thus, installing an automated smart greenhouse 
powered by the Internet of Things (IoT) and an Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS) might be the 
best option to increase food output on the land. Real-time sensors are used to gather four types of weather data: 
temperature, humidity, direct sunlight, and soil moisture. The fuzzy control system then receives these gathered 
data as input variables. The data are subsequently modified by the optimal values for the climate parameters 
are then determined by ANFIS and the fuzzy control system. When the optimal winter temperature is 24 °C 
and the relative humidity is 76.00%, crops grown during the winter are considered in the final simulation. 
The technique has a 93.62% detection accuracy at the perception layer, with precision at 0.83, recall at 0.78, 
and FI score at 0.81 26. The learning-to-prediction approach was proposed by the authors as a way to improve 
the predictive algorithms’ accuracy in dynamic circumstances. To evaluate the sustainability of the proposed 
approach, an artificial neural network (ANN) learning module is built to increase the accuracy of the Kalman 
filter method. In experiments, the Kalman filter technique is used to accurately predict the parameters of the 
indoor climate (temperature, CO 2, and humidity) from noisy sensor measurements in an inside setting that 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1752 4| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-84141-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/