

--- page 1 ---
8.23.5
Deep Learning Based Prediction on
Greenhouse Crop Yield Combined
TCN and RNN
Liyun Gong, Miao Yu, Shouyong Jiang, Vassilis Cutsuridis a nd Simon Pearson
Topic Collection
Convolutional Neural Networks Applications in Sensing and Imaging: Architectures, Insight,
Visualization, Transparency
Edited by
Prof. Dr. Stefanos Kollias
Communication
https://doi.org/10.3390/s21134537


--- page 2 ---
sensors
Communication
Deep Learning Based Prediction on Greenhouse Crop Yield
Combined TCN and RNN
Liyun Gong 1,*, Miao Yu 1, Shouyong Jiang 1, V assilis Cutsuridis1 and Simon Pearson 2
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045/gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Gong, L.; Yu, M.; Jiang, S.;
Cutsuridis, V .; Pearson, S. Deep
Learning Based Prediction on
Greenhouse Crop Yield Combined
TCN and RNN. Sensors 2021, 21, 4537.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s21134537
Academic Editor: Benoit V ozel
Received: 17 May 2021
Accepted: 25 June 2021
Published: 1 July 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
1 School of Computer Science, University of Lincoln, Lincoln LN6 7TS, UK; myu@lincoln.ac.uk (M.Y .);
sjiang@lincoln.ac.uk (S.J.); vcutsuridis@lincoln.ac.uk (V .C.)
2 Lincoln Institute for Agri-Food Technology , University of Lincoln, Lincoln LN6 7TS, UK;
SPearson@lincoln.ac.uk
* Correspondence: yun200634234@outlook.com
Abstract:
Currently , greenhouses are widely applied for plant growth, and environmental parameters
can also be controlled in the modern greenhouse to guarantee the maximum crop yield. In order
to optimally control greenhouses’ environmental parameters, one indispensable requirement is
to accurately predict crop yields based on given environmental parameter settings. In addition,
crop yield forecasting in greenhouses plays an important role in greenhouse farming planning and
management, which allows cultivators and farmers to utilize the yield prediction results to make
knowledgeable management and ﬁnancial decisions. It is thus important to accurately predict the
crop yield in a greenhouse considering the beneﬁts that can be brought by accurate greenhouse
crop yield prediction. In this work, we have developed a new greenhouse crop yield prediction
technique, by combining two state-of-the-arts networks for temporal sequence processing—temporal
convolutional network (TCN) and recurrent neural network (RNN). Comprehensive evaluations of
the proposed algorithm have been made on multiple datasets obtained from multiple real greenhouse
sites for tomato growing. Based on a statistical analysis of the root mean square errors (RMSEs)
between the predicted and actual crop yields, it is shown that the proposed approach achieves more
accurate yield prediction performance than both traditional machine learning methods and other
classical deep neural networks. Moreover, the experimental study also shows that the historical yield
information is the most important factor for accurately predicting future crop yields.
Keywords:
deep learning; temporal convolutional network (TCN); recurrent neural network (RNN);
crop yield prediction; greenhouse
1. Introduction
Compared with ﬁeld growing, currently , greenhouse growing is preferred by many
crop growers. Growing crops in the greenhouse can extend their growing season, protect
crops against temperature and weather changes and thus provide a safe growing environ-
ment. Moreover, environmental parameters (e.g., humidity , temperature radiation, carbon
dioxide, etc. [1,2] can also be controlled in the modern greenhouse to guarantee crops grow
at the most appropriate environmental conditions.
Crop yield forecasting in greenhouses plays an important role in farming planning
and management in greenhouses, and optimally controlling environmental parameters
guarantees the maximum crop yield. Cultivators and farmers can utilize yield prediction in
greenhouses to make knowledgeable management and ﬁnancial decisions. However, it is
an extremely challenging task. There are many factors that have an inﬂuence on crop yield
in a greenhouse, such as radiations, carbon dioxide concentrations, temperature, quality of
crop seeds, soil quality and fertilization, and disease occurrences (as shown in [ 3–5]). It is
not straightforward to construct an explicit model to reﬂect the relationship between such
a variety of factors and crop yield.
Sensors 2021, 21, 4537. https://doi.org/10.3390/s21134537 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors


--- page 3 ---
Sensors 2021, 21, 4537 2 of 16
In this work, we propose a deep neural network-based greenhouse crop yield predic-
tion method, by combining two state-of-the-art networks for temporal sequence processing:
recurrent neural network (RNN) and temporal convolutional network (TCN). The pro-
posed deep neural network is developed for predicting future crop yields in a greenhouse
based on a sequence of historical greenhouse input parameters (e.g., temperature, humidity ,
carbon dioxide, radiation) as well as yield information. According to the experimental
evaluations of multiple datasets collected from multiple greenhouses in different time
periods, it is shown that the RNN+TCN-based deep learning approach achieves more
accurate yield prediction results with smaller root mean square errors (RMSEs), compared
with both classical machine learning and other popular deep learning-based counterparts.
2. Literature Works
Although there is much research related to crop yield prediction for the farming
ﬁeld, a relatively small amount of works focus on greenhouse crop yield forecasting.
Approaches that have been developed for greenhouse crop yield forecasting are divided
into two main categories: the explanatory biophysical model-based approach and the data
driven/machine learning model-based approach.
Explanatory biophysical model-based approach: Based on a series of ordinary differ-
ential equations (ODEs) reﬂecting a dynamic process, the explanatory model describes the
relationship between some environmental factors and crop growth or morphological devel-
opment. Different biophysical models have been applied for crop growth modelling which
can thus be used for yield forecasting, based on greenhouse environmental parameters.
The Tomgro model is proposed by Jones et al. in [ 6], which models the tomato growth
and fruit yield with respect to dynamically changing temperature, solar radiation, and CO 2
concentration inside a greenhouse. A more complex Tomsim biophysical model is proposed
in [7], which contains multiple sub-modules developed for modelling different aspects
(i.e., photosynthesis, dry matter production, truss appearance rate, fruit growth period
and dry matter partitioning, etc.) related to tomato growth. A crop yield model that
describes the effects of greenhouse climate on yield based on ODEs was described and
validated in [
4]. This yield model was validated for four temperature regimes. Results
demonstrated that the tomato yield was simulated accurately for both near-optimal and
non-optimal temperature conditions in the Netherlands and southern Spain, respectively ,
with varying light and CO 2 concentrations. An integrated Yield Prediction Model [ 8],
which is an integration of Tomgro model [ 6] and Vanthoor model [ 4], is applied to predict
the crop yield in greenhouses based on controllable greenhouse environmental parameters.
Different biophysical models, including Vanthoor model [ 4], Tomsim model [ 7], Green-
house Technology applications (GTa) model, the model proposed in [ 9] and their combined
version were compared in [ 10]. The experimental studies show that the combined model
can outperform original models with smaller root mean square errors (RMSEs) for yield
prediction. The biophysical models proposed in [ 11,12] describe effects of electrical con-
ductivity , nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, and light quality on dry matter yield and
photosynthesis of greenhouse tomatoes and cucumbers, respectively .
The explanatory model is practical to reﬂect the actual growth process of crops, which
is bio-physically meaningful and explainable. However, the aforementioned explanatory
models suffer from the following two main limitations:
(i) There are many intrinsic model parameters associated with a biophysical model and
the performance of an explanatory model is highly sensitive to its model parameters
(as shown in [ 13]). Moreover, the model parameter setting suitable for predicting
greenhouse crop yield in one region may not be workable for other regions [ 13].
(ii) In addition, most biophysical models are also not universal and restricted to model the
growth for a speciﬁc type of plant. For example, the Tomgro model [ 6] and Tomsim
model [7] can only be used to model/predict the growth/yield of tomatoes.
Due to the limitations of the explanatory biophysical model-based approaches, in this
work, we refer to another category of approach–machine learning model-based approach


--- page 4 ---
Sensors 2021, 21, 4537 3 of 16
for greenhouse crop yield prediction. More details of the machine learning model-based
approach are introduced as follows.
Machine learning model-based approach: Data driven/machine learning technique-
based approaches have also been applied for greenhouse crop yield forecasting in many
studies, which treat the crop yield output as a very complex and nonlinear function of the
greenhouse environmental variables and historical crop yield information. In particular,
linear and polynomial regression models are used in [ 14] for strawberry growth and fruit
yield using environmental data such as average daily air temperature (ADAT), relative
humidity (RH), soil moisture content (SMC), and so on. However, an assumption of
a linear or polynomial relationship between the crop yield and environmental factors
is not always valid. Partial least squares regression (PLSR) has been applied in [
15],
for modelling the yield of snap bean based on the data collected from hyperspectral sensing.
Neural networks have also been widely applied for greenhouse crop yield prediction.
For example, an artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) has been applied in [
16], for weekly
crop yield prediction. While in [ 17], ANN has been applied to predict the pepper fruit
yield based on factors such as fruit water content, days to ﬂowering initiation, and so
on. An Evolving Fuzzy Neural Network (EFuNN) was proposed in [ 18] for automatic
tomato yield prediction, given different environmental variables inside the greenhouse,
namely , temperature, CO
2, vapour pressure deﬁcit (VPD), and radiation, as well as past
yield. A Dynamic Artiﬁcial Neural Network (DANN) [ 19] was implemented to predict
tomato yields, based on a series of predictors such as CO 2 ﬁxation, transpiration, solar
radiation as well as past yield. The ﬁndings show that the most important environmental
variable for yield prediction was CO 2 ﬁxation, and the least important was transpiration.
Although ANN-based approaches have been widely applied for greenhouse crop yield
prediction tasks as in [ 16–19], their performance is highly sensitive to different choices of
network architectures and network hyper-parameters settings. Furthermore, there is a
lack of studies on optimally designing network architecture and tuning network hyper-
parameters for the greenhouse crop yield prediction.
The aforementioned works focus on using classical machine learning approaches
for greenhouse crop yield prediction. Given a certain amount of training data, classical
machine learning models (such as linear/polynomial regression models, artiﬁcial neural
network model, etc.) are constructed to predict greenhouse crop yields based on certain
factors (such as environmental and past yield information). However, these works suffer
from limitations due to the adoptions of simple and ‘shallow’ classical machine learning
models, for example:
(i) Features extracted from data for building the classical machine learning models may
not be optimal and most representative, thus deteriorating the performance for yield
prediction (as shown by our experiment, in most cases, the classical machine learning
models perform worse than the deep learning-based ones).
(ii) The classical machine learning models cannot effectively handle data with either high
volume or high complexity .
Deep learning is a very popular machine learning technique and it has been suc-
cessfully applied in a variety of applications (e.g., image classiﬁcation, computer vision,
natural language processing, etc.) [ 20]. Recently , deep learning technology has also been
applied for crop yield prediction in the outdoor environment. For example, in [ 21], a recur-
rent neural network deep learning algorithm over the Q-Learning reinforcement learning
algorithm is used to predict the crop yield. The results show that the proposed model
outperforms the existing models with high accuracy for crop yield prediction. CNN and
LSTM are combined in [ 22] for both end-of-season and in-season county-level soybean
yield prediction, based on the remote sensing data in the outdoor environment. Compared
with the outdoor application scenarios, there are very few works related to the applications
of the deep learning approach for indoor greenhouse crop yield prediction. Some related
works can be found in [ 5,23], from which the researchers have adopted the recurrent
neural network (RNN) model with long-short temporal memory (LSTM) units for tomato