

--- page 1 ---
Smart Agricultural Technology 10 (2025) 100751
Available online 31 December 2024
2772-3755/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Smart Agricultural Technology
journal homepage: www.journals.elsevier.com/smart-agricultural-technology
Reinforcement learning-based model predictive control for greenhouse 
climate control
Samuel Mallicka, ,∗,1, Filippo Airaldia, ,1, Azita Dabiria, , Congcong Sunb, ,
BartDe  Schuttera,
a Delft Center for Systems and Control, Delft University of Technology, 2628 CD, Delft, the Netherlands
b Agricultural Biosystems Engineering Group, Wageningen University, 6700 AA, Wageningen, the Netherlands
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T 
Keywords:
Greenhouse climate control
Model predictive control
Reinforcement learning
Greenhouse climate control is concerned with maximizing performance in terms of crop yield and resource ef-
ﬁciency. One promising approach is model predictive control (MPC), which leverages a model of the system to 
optimize the control inputs, while enforcing physical constraints. However, prediction models for greenhouse 
systems are inherently inaccurate due to the complexity of the real system and the uncertainty in predicted 
weather proﬁles. For model-based control approaches such as MPC, this can degrade performance and lead to 
constraint violations. Existing approaches address uncertainty in the prediction model with robust or stochastic 
MPC methodology; however, these necessarily reduce crop yield due to conservatism and often bear higher com-
putational loads. In contrast, learning-based control approaches, such as reinforcement learning (RL), can handle 
uncertainty naturally by leveraging data to improve performance. This work proposes an MPC-based RL control 
framework to optimize the climate control performance in the presence of prediction uncertainty. The approach 
employs a parametrized MPC scheme that learns directly from data, in an online fashion, the parametrization 
of the constraints, prediction model, and optimization cost that minimizes constraint violations and maximizes 
climate control performance. Simulations show that the approach can learn an MPC controller that signiﬁcantly
outperforms the current state-of-the-art in terms of constraint violations and eﬃcient crop growth.
1. Introduction
Greenhouse climate control presents a key opportunity to address the 
growing world population’s food production requirements in a changing 
climate, and the grand societal challenge of eﬃcient energy consump-
tion. With modern greenhouses equipped with actuation systems such 
as heating, ventilation, and CO2 injection, eﬀective control approaches 
can lead to high crop yield in an energy-eﬃcient manner. However, the 
control challenge is diﬃcult as the process dynamics are highly nonlin-
ear and complex [28], and the climate variables, such as temperature 
and humidity, must be eﬀectively constrained to avoid damage to crops 
due to, e.g., spread of diseases [6,34,11]. While traditional methods, e.g.,
on-oﬀ and PID control, have been used for low-level regulation, these 
strategies are not rooted in optimal control and are in general unable to 
deliver optimal performance and to systematically handle complex state 
and/or input constraints [12,15].
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address:s.h.mallick@tudelft.nl(S. Mallick).
1 These authors contributed equally to this work.
Model predictive control (MPC) is an optimization-based control 
methodology that naturally handles multi-input-multi-output systems 
with state, input, and output constraints [5]. It has seen huge theoret-
ical success and application in process control, and has been proposed 
to solve greenhouse control challenges [3,10,21]. However, MPC relies 
heavily on an accurate prediction model, while in a greenhouse pre-
diction model there always exist uncertainties due to, e.g., modeling 
error and inaccurate weather forecasting. For model-based control, an 
incorrect model can lead the controller to drive the system to an un-
desired point of operation, possibly violating constraints. Furthermore,
as constraints often represent the validity range for the accuracy of the 
prediction model, violations of the constraints can lead to degraded per-
formance when applied to the real system [34].
Some existing works have addressed prediction uncertainty only in 
the context of external disturbances, such as weather predictions [6,14].
In [8], the uncertainty in market prices is addressed with a scenario-
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atech.2024.100751
Received 14 October 2024; Received in revised form 17 December 2024; Accepted 24 December 2024 


--- page 2 ---
Smart Agricultural Technology 10 (2025) 100751
2
S. Mallick, F. Airaldi, A. Dabiri et al. 
based stochastic MPC controller; however, the controller is based on 
mixed-integer optimization, requiring signiﬁcant computational eﬀorts.
Alternatively, the following existing works have explored uncertainty
stemming from an incorrect physical model of the system. In [12], the 
robustness of predictive control for a greenhouse in the presence of 
model uncertainties is considered empirically, however no mechanism 
to compensate for the prediction error is introduced. In [19,20], a neu-
ral network is used as a prediction model, with a robust MPC controller
addressing the prediction uncertainty; however, a min-max robust MPC 
approach is used, which is inherently conservative. In [34], an approach 
to mitigating the negative eﬀects of model uncertainty is presented us-
ing online parameter estimation. However, only a small subset of the 
(possibly) uncertain model parameters are estimated. Of particular note,
in [4], parametric uncertainty in all model parameters is addressed.
A robust sample-based MPC controller is proposed to incorporate the 
uncertainty into the control approach. However, the resulting control 
scheme is unable to adequately reduce constraint violations, and re-
sults in less crop yield due to conservativeness. More recently, [27] has 
proposed a chance-constrained stochastic MPC formulation to address 
parametric uncertainties in greenhouse production systems. However,
this approach relies on linearization of the prediction model, further
increasing prediction uncertainty. Additionally, the chance constrained 
formulation leads to a computational load that is higher than traditional 
MPC schemes.
In contrast to MPC, reinforcement learning (RL) is a model-free con-
trol methodology where a control policy is learned from data observed 
from the system [26]. RL controllers naturally handle uncertainty and 
adapt to changing conditions with no additional mechanisms, as they are 
learned through direct interaction with the real system. For complex sys-
tems with large continuous state and action spaces, the state-of-the-art 
for RL uses deep neural networks (DNNs) as function approximators to 
represent the controller. With the power of DNNs as general function 
approximators, this idea has seen unprecedented success on previously
unsolved problems, e.g., the games of chess and Go [25]. The power
and inherent uncertainty handling of RL has been identiﬁed as useful 
for greenhouse climate control, with [32] proposing a DNN-based RL ap-
proach based on deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) [17], and 
[22] drawing a comparison between MPC and DDPG. However, an inher-
ent drawback for RL controllers is the absence of theoretical guarantees 
on the satisfaction of constraints and a lack of interpretability due to the 
black-box DNN function approximation. In the context of greenhouse 
control, this means growers have no guarantee that the automated con-
troller will eﬀectively constrain climate variables to safe ranges, with 
potential negative implications on crop health and proﬁt.
Recently, [9] proposed and justiﬁed an integrated MPC and RL con-
trol paradigm, where the MPC controller serves as a function approxima-
tor for the optimal policy in model-based RL. Fig. 1depicts a schematic 
overview of this architecture. In such a scheme, the MPC controller’s op-
timization problem acts both as policy provider, picking actions based 
on a state, and value function approximator, estimating ‘how good’ it is 
to be in a given state. The learning algorithm, e.g., Q-learning [33], is 
tasked with adjusting the parametrization of the MPC controller in an 
eﬀort to discover the optimal control policy, thus improving closed-loop 
performance in a data-driven fashion. In this way, despite the presence 
of mismatches between the prediction model and the real system, the 
MPC control scheme is able to learn and deliver, at convergence, the op-
timal policy and value functions of the underlying RL task, granted the 
MPC parametrization is rich enough. In contrast to DNN-based RL, the 
MPC scheme at the core of this approach provides the option of inte-
grating prior information that may be known on the system in the form 
of, e.g., an expert-based, possibly imperfect, prediction model. More-
over, MPC-based agents are in general more amenable to analysis and 
certiﬁcation in terms of stability and constraint satisfaction [5]. Finally,
MPC-based controllers can take constraints into account in an explicit 
and structured way, which DNNs are generally incapable of doing. The 
above beneﬁts render this methodology suitable for greenhouse climate 
Fig. 1.Diagram of the MPC-based RL architecture. 
control, where an inaccurate prediction model is known, and climate 
variables must be constrained. 
Therefore, in this work we propose an integrated MPC and RL frame-
work to address the problem of greenhouse climate control under para-
metric uncertainty stemming from uncertain weather predictions and 
modeling mismatches. Speciﬁcally:
1. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, a combined MPC and RL
approach for greenhouse climate control in the presence of uncer-
tainty is proposed for the ﬁrst time. A parametrized MPC scheme,
inspired by [9], is crafted to serve as policy provider and value func-
tion approximator in an RL formulation of the greenhouse climate 
control problem. A second-order Q-learning algorithm is leveraged 
to adjust the parametrization of the MPC scheme online, automati-
cally learning a control policy. The approach provides an adaptive 
and high-performing climate controller that minimizes potentially
dangerous constraint violations, without negatively aﬀecting crop 
growth due to robustness conservatism, and without relying on an 
expensive-to-acquire accurate prediction model. Additionally, in 
contrast to DNN-based learning approaches, the behavior of the 
resulting controller can be interpreted by analyzing the learned 
parametrization of the constraints, prediction model, and cost func-
tion.
2. The approach is then validated in simulation, and compared against 
both model-based MPC and model-free RL state-of-the-art con-
trollers. The results demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of the approach,
with the proposed methodology outperforming existing controllers 
from the literature in both constraint satisfaction and eﬃcient crop 
growth.
Compared to the state-of-the-art MPC formulations [4,8,19,20,27],
instead of addressing uncertainty in the parametrization in a robust or
stochastic fashion, the proposed methodology adapts its policy via RL in 
order to improve closed-loop performance. This has the distinct advan-
tage of yielding less conservative control schemes while retaining low
computational complexity. In comparison with DNN-based approaches 
such as [22,32], our method integrates MPC as function approximator
in the RL algorithm, fostering a model-based approach that is more suit-
able for learning high-performance, constraint-abiding policies.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2relevant background 
is provided on the greenhouse model used, and on the combined MPC 
and RL paradigm from [9]. The problem we address is formally deﬁned 
in Section 3. Section 4 presents the proposed methodology, which is 
then applied and assessed extensively in simulation in Section 5. Finally,
conclusions and future work directions are given in Section 6.
2. Background
This section describes the greenhouse model considered in this work.
Additionally, background theory on combining MPC and RL is provided,
upon which the methodology proposed in this paper is built.


--- page 3 ---
Smart Agricultural Technology 10 (2025) 100751
3
S. Mallick, F. Airaldi, A. Dabiri et al. 
Table 1
Physical meaning of the state 𝑥, output 𝑦, input 𝑢, and disturbance 𝑑.
𝑥1 dry-weight (kgm−2) 𝑦1 dry-weight (g m−2) 𝑑1 radiation (W m−2) 
𝑥2 indoor CO2 (kgm−3) 𝑦2 indoor CO2 (‰ ) 𝑑2 outdoor CO2 (kgm−3) 
𝑥3 indoor temperature (◦C) 𝑦3 indoor temperature (◦C) 𝑑3 outdoor temperature (◦C) 
𝑥4 indoor humidity (kgm−3) 𝑦4 indoor humidity (%) 𝑑4 outdoor humidity (kgm−3)
𝑢1 CO2 injection (mgm−2s−1) 𝑢2 ventilation (mms−1) 𝑢3 heating (W m−2) 
2.1. Lettuce greenhouse model
We consider a greenhouse for lettuce growing, with the continuous-
time model, presented in [28], given in the Appendix. While the 
continuous-time model is used in all simulations, for control purposes a 
discrete-time model is considered
𝑥(𝑘+1)= 𝑓(𝑥(𝑘),𝑢(𝑘),𝑑(𝑘),𝑝),
𝑦(𝑘)= 𝑔(𝑥(𝑘),𝑝),
(1)
with 𝑥∈ℝ4 the state, 𝑢∈ℝ3 the control input, 𝑑∈ℝ4 the weather
disturbance, and 𝑦∈ℝ4 the output. Furthermore, 𝑝∈ℝ28 is a set of 
model parameters, and 𝑘∈ℤ+ is the discrete-time counter for discrete 
time steps of Δ𝑡= 900s (15 minutes). The nonlinear functions 𝑓and 
𝑔, and the model parameters 𝑝, are given in the Appendix. The physical 
meaning of the states, outputs, inputs, and disturbances is summarized 
in Table 1. Estimation is out the scope of this paper, and it is assumed,
as in [4], that at each time step 𝑘a perfect estimate of the state 𝑥(𝑘)is 
available. 
2.2. MPC as a function approximator in RL
Consider discrete-time system dynamics as a Markov Decision Pro-
cess (MDP) [26] with continuous state 𝑠∈ℝ𝑛, continuous action 𝑎∈ℝ𝑚,
and state transitions 𝑠,𝑎→𝑠+ with the underlying conditional probabil-
ity density
ℙ[𝑠+|𝑠,𝑎]∶ℝ𝑛× ℝ𝑚× ℝ𝑛→[0,1]. (2)
Consider a deterministic policy 𝜋𝜃(𝑠)∶ℝ𝑛→ ℝ𝑚parametrized by 𝜃∈
ℝ𝑙. Selecting actions based on this policy will cause the system to visit 
the MDP’s states with a given distribution, denoted 𝜂𝜋𝜃. The perfor-
mance of such a policy is deﬁned as [26]
𝐽(𝜋𝜃)= 𝔼𝜂𝜋𝜃
[𝑁s∑
𝑘=0
𝛾𝑘𝐿
(
𝑠𝑘,𝜋𝜃
(𝑠𝑘
))]
, (3)
where 𝑠𝑘is the state at time step 𝑘, 𝐿(𝑠,𝑎)∶ℝ𝑛× ℝ𝑚→ ℝ the stage 
cost, 𝛾∈( 0,1] the discount factor, and 𝑁s the number of time steps 
considered in a task. The RL task is then to ﬁnd the optimal policy 𝜋⋆
𝜃
as
𝜋⋆
𝜃= arg min
𝜃
𝐽(𝜋𝜃). (4)
The familiar notions of state-and  action-value functions [26] are deﬁned 
respectively as 
𝑄𝜃
(𝑠𝑘,𝑎𝑘
)=𝐿
(
𝑠𝑘,𝑎𝑘
)
+ 𝔼𝜂𝜋𝜃
[ 𝑁s∑
𝜏=𝑘+1
𝛾𝜏−𝑘𝐿
(
𝑠𝑘,𝜋𝜃
(𝑠𝑘
))]
, (5)
and 𝑉𝜃
(
𝑠𝑘
)
=𝑄𝜃
(
𝑠𝑘,𝜋𝜃
(
𝑠𝑘
))
. While DNNs are the most common choice 
for representing the policy and value functions [17], their black-box
nature does not facilitate the injection of prior information, e.g., approx-
imate prediction models, nor is it conducive to an interpretable policy
and the addition of constraints. To account for these drawbacks, [9] pro-
posed the use of an MPC scheme in place of a DNN.
Consider the following MPC problem approximating the value func-
tion, parametrized by 𝜃, 𝑉𝜃∶ℝ𝑛→ ℝ as
𝑉𝜃(𝑠)=  minx, u, 𝝈 𝜆𝜃
(𝑥(0))
+
𝑁−1∑
𝑘=0 
𝛾𝑘
(
𝐿𝜃
(𝑥(𝑘),𝑢(𝑘))+𝜔⊤𝜎(𝑘)
)
+𝛾𝑁
(
𝑉f
𝜃
(𝑥(𝑁))+𝑤⊤
f 𝜎(𝑁)
)
(6a)
s.t.𝑥 (0)= 𝑠, (6b)
for 𝑘=0,… ,𝑁−1
𝑥(𝑘+1)= 𝑓𝜃
(𝑥(𝑘),𝑢(𝑘)), (6c)
ℎ𝜃
(𝑥(𝑘),𝑢(𝑘))≤𝜎(𝑘), (6d)
𝜎(𝑘) ≥0, (6e)
ℎf
𝜃
(𝑥(𝑁))≤𝜎(𝑁), (6f)
𝜎(𝑁) ≥0, (6g)
where slack variable 𝜎(𝑘)softens the inequality constraint for time step 
𝑘, and the vectors x, uand 𝝈respectively collect the states, actions, and 
slack variables over the horizon 𝑁. Problem (6)i s solved numerically
online to generate the value 𝑉𝜃(𝑠). In (6), 𝜆𝜃is an initial cost term, 𝐿𝜃
is the stage cost, and 𝑉f
𝜃is a terminal cost approximation, all of which 
are parametrized by 𝜃. Furthermore, 𝑓𝜃is the model approximation, and 
ℎ𝜃, ℎf
𝜃are inequality constraints. Lastly, 𝑤and 𝑤f are the weights of the 
slack variable in the objective. Note that the formulation (6)is  general,
i.e., the dimension of 𝜃, and how it enters into the respective functions 
in (6), is not made explicit. In Section 4 we will introduce a concrete 
realization, designed for the greenhouse climate control problem.
Given (6), the action value function 𝑄𝜃and the policy 𝜋𝜃, satisfying 
the fundamental equalities of the Bellman equations [9], are deﬁned as 
follows:
𝑄𝜃(𝑠,𝑎)=  minx, u, 𝝈 (6a)
s.t. (6b)−(6g),
𝑢(0)= 𝑎,
(7)
𝜋𝜃(𝑠)=  arg min
𝑎 
𝑄𝜃(𝑠,𝑎). (8)
Therefore, in RL terms, the parametric MPC scheme acts as policy
provider for the learning agent, whose goal is to modify the parame-
ters 𝜃of the controller in order to minimize (4). Various forms of RL
[26] exist that solve this problem directly or indirectly via iterative up-
dates 
𝜃←𝜃−𝛼∇𝜃
𝑚 ∑
𝑖=1 
𝜓(𝑠𝑖,𝑎𝑖,𝑠𝑖+1,𝜃), (9)
where 𝛼∈ℝ+ is the learning rate, 𝑧denotes the number of observa-
tions used in the update (i.e., a batch of observations), and 𝜓captures 
the controller’s performance and varies with the speciﬁc algorithm. For
example, in recursive Q-learning we have that 𝑚=1 and 𝜓=𝛿2
𝑖, where 
the temporal-diﬀerence (TD) error
𝛿𝑖=𝐿(𝑠𝑖,𝑎𝑖)+ 𝛾𝑉𝜃(𝑠𝑖+1)−𝑄𝜃(𝑠𝑖,𝑎𝑖) (10)
captures the estimation error of the value functions [26].


--- page 4 ---
Smart Agricultural Technology 10 (2025) 100751
4
S. Mallick, F. Airaldi, A. Dabiri et al. 
3. Problem formulation
We address the problem of optimal greenhouse climate control for
crop yield and resource eﬃciency. As in [4], we consider the predictive 
uncertainty, stemming from uncertain weather predictions and mod-
eling errors, to be captured by parametric uncertainty2 in the model 
parameters 𝑝. Speciﬁcally, the true values for 𝑝are assumed to be un-
known.
Growth cycles of 40 days are considered, where control inputs are 
computed at 15 minute time steps, i.e., growth cycles of 𝑁s = 3840
time steps. This duration is in line with the literature [4,22], and rep-
resents a standard lettuce growth cycle, at the end of which the let-
tuce is harvested and sold, generating economic proﬁt. During each 
growth cycle, we wish to maximize the yield and minimize the viola-
tions of constraints on the system outputs, whilst minimizing the cost 
associated with control signals. The system outputs are constrained as 
𝑦min(𝑘) ≤𝑦(𝑘) ≤𝑦max(𝑘), with [4,22]
𝑦min(𝑘)=
(
0,0,𝑦3,min
(𝑑1(𝑘)),0
)⊤
,
𝑦max(𝑘)=
(
∞,1.6,𝑦3,max
(𝑑1(𝑘)),70
)⊤
,
(11)
and with the time-varying third element deﬁned as
𝑦3,min
(𝑑)=
{
10, if 𝑑<10
15, if 𝑑≥10,
𝑦3,max
(𝑑)=
{
15, if 𝑑<10
20, if 𝑑≥10.
(12)
These time varying constraints are common in the literature; they reﬂect 
that inside the greenhouse it is colder during the night than during the 
day [22,4,24]. The inputs are constrained as 𝑢min ≤𝑢(𝑘) ≤𝑢max, with 
[4,22]
𝑢min =(0,0,0)⊤,
𝑢max =(1.2,7.5,150)⊤.
(13)
Finally, the input rate is constrained as [4,22]
|𝑢(𝑘+1)−𝑢(𝑘)|≤(1∕10)𝑢max. (14)
Deﬁne the following performance indicators:
•Final yield 𝑦1(𝑁s)
•Constraint violations Ψ
•Economic proﬁt indicator 𝑃.
The ﬁnal yield 𝑦1(𝑁s)is the dry lettuce weight at the end of a growth 
cycle of 𝑁s time steps. The constraint violations indicator Ψis deﬁned 
as
Ψ=
𝑁s∑
𝑘=0
4 ∑
𝑖=1 
(
max
(
0,
𝑦𝑖(𝑘)−𝑦𝑖,max(𝑘) 
𝑦𝑖,max(𝑘)−𝑦𝑖,min(𝑘)
)
+max
(
0,
𝑦𝑖,min(𝑘)−𝑦𝑖(𝑘) 
𝑦𝑖,max(𝑘)−𝑦𝑖,min(𝑘)
))
. (15)
2 The choice to represent modeling error and weather prediction inaccuracy
via the uncertainty in 𝑝results in a prediction model in which even the param-
eters that may represent known physical quantities, e.g., the ideal gas constant 
𝑝23, being unknown.
Table 2
Coeﬃcient values for the economic proﬁt 
indicator 𝑃(the former Dutch currency Hﬂ,
the Guilder, is used for adherence to the lit-
erature [4,22,27–29]).
Symbol Value Unit 
𝑐price,1 1.8 Hflm −2
𝑐price,2 1.6 Hflkg −1
𝑐q 6.35 ⋅10−9 HflJ −1
𝑐CO2
42 ⋅10−2 Hflkg −1
Δ𝑡 900 s
This performance indicator captures the magnitude of violations on the 
output constraints over a growth cycle. Finally, the economic proﬁt in-
dicator3 𝑃is deﬁned as [29,22]
𝑃=𝑐price,1 +𝑐price,2 𝑦1(𝑁s)−
𝑁s∑
𝑘=0
(𝑐CO2𝑢1(𝑘)+ 𝑐q𝑢3(𝑘))Δ𝑡, (16)
where the relation between auction price and harvest weight of lettuce 
is modeled linearly with coeﬃcients 𝑐price,1 and 𝑐price,2, and the ﬁnan-
cial cost of the climate conditioning equipment is linearly related to the 
amount of energy and carbon dioxide put into the system, weighted by
prices 𝑐q and 𝑐CO2, respectively. Note that in 𝑃no cost is associated to 
natural ventilation used for cooling and dehumidiﬁcation, i.e., 𝑢2 [8].
The values of the coeﬃcients of this economic model are given in Ta-
ble 2, and more details are available in, e.g., [29, Section 2.1]. This 
performance indicator represents the monetary value of a growth cy-
cle, and captures the eﬃciency of the control with respect to the use of 
costly actuators. 
4. Methodology
To address the issues caused by inaccurate knowledge of the true 
prediction model parameters 𝑝for model-based MPC controllers, we 
propose a novel parametrized MPC scheme for the greenhouse climate 
control problem. Then, leveraging closed loop data, we show how the 
parameter values can be learned using RL techniques [9], compensating 
for the performance loss introduced by an inaccurate prediction model.
4.1. Greenhouse climate control as an RL problem
In order to apply an RL methodology to learn the MPC parametriza-
tion, the greenhouse climate control must be modeled as an RL task, i.e.,
as an MDP deﬁned as in Section 2.2. Trivially, the greenhouse input vari-
able 𝑢corresponds directly to the actions 𝑎in the RL context. Deﬁne the 
concatenation of the current state, and the current and previous outputs,
as the RL state:
𝑠(𝑘)=
(
𝑥⊤(𝑘),𝑦⊤(𝑘),𝑦⊤(𝑘−1)
)⊤. (17)
Furthermore, the state transitions are determined by the true system 
model (1), where the exact probabilities are conditioned on the weather
disturbance 𝑑. Note that, to enforce the control rate constraint (14)i n 
the MDP, the input variable is clipped prior to being applied to the sys-
tem.
The stage cost 𝐿requires particular attention, as it implicitly deﬁnes 
the optimization problem (4)t h a t the RL agent is tasked with solving.
Crafting the stage cost 𝐿such that the resulting RL policy performs well 
with respect to the performance indicators deﬁned in Section 3is a de-
sign challenge. Consider the stage cost
3 Note that 𝑃represents a proﬁt indicator per square meter, as the lettuce 
model in this work is normalized by the surface area (see Section 2.1and [28,
29]).