

--- page 1 ---
MJSAT 4 (2) 169-179 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
KEYWORDS 
 
ARTICLE HISTORY 
` 
 
 
 
 
 
IoT-enabled Greenhouse Systems: Optimizing Plant Growth and Efficiency 
 
Swathi Manoharan1, Chong Peng Lean *1, Chen Li 1,2, Kong Feng Yuan 3, Ng Poh Kiat 3 and M. Reyasudin 
Basir Khan4 
 
1 School of Engineering and Computing, MILA University, No 1, MIU Boulevard, Putra Nilai, Nilai 71800, Malaysia. 
 2 Hainan Yuanli Artificial intelligence Technology Co.,Ltd., Room 207, Building B, No.3 Haitao Avenue, Jiangdong New District, 
Haikou City, Hainan Province, China. 
3 Faculty of Engineering and Technology, Multimedia University, Jalan Ayer Keroh Lama, Melaka 75450, Malaysia. 
4 Tun Razak Graduate School (TRGS), Universiti Tun Abdul Razak (UNIRAZAK), Wisma UNIRAZAK, 195A, Jln Tun Razak, 
Hampshire Park, Kuala Lumpur, 50450, Malaysia. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The Internet of Things (IoT) refers to the network of 
physical objects or "things" embedded with sensors, software, 
and other technologies that enable them to connect and 
exchange data with other devices and systems over the internet 
[1]. These objects can range from everyday items such as 
household appliances and wearable devices to industrial 
machinery and infrastructure components  [2]. IoT technology 
allows these objects to collect and transmit data about their 
environment, usage, and status, facilitati ng real -time 
monitoring, control, and automation of various processes. By 
enabling seamless communication between devices, IoT has the 
potential to revolutionize numerous industries, including 
agriculture, healthcare, transportation, manufacturing, and 
smart cities, among others. It promises to improve efficiency, 
optimize resource utilization, enhance decision -making, and 
create new oppo rtunities for innovation and business growth.  
Thus, IoT is widely used in various fields for optimization and 
smart control [3-6]. 
As an example, IoT is used in e nergy harvesting purpose. 
It is used in energy harvesting by integrating sensors and 
devices with energy -harvesting technologies such as solar 
panels, microbial fuel cell [ 7-9], and plant microbial fuel cell  
[10-12]. These IoT devices can gather energy from their 
Greenhouses have long been important in the advancement of agricultural operations 
because they provide regulated settings for optimal plant growth. With the introduction of 
real-time monitoring and automation capabilities, the Internet of Things (IoT) integration 
into greenhouse systems represents a revolutionary change. This abstract delves into the 
wider field of greenhouse technology, highlighting the role that IoT plays in improving 
agricultural in controlled environments. Conventional greenhouses provide plants with a 
protected environment, but they might not be as accurate or flexible. Intelligent control of 
environmental conditions is made possible by the introduction of IoT-enabled greenhouses, 
which utilize data exchange protocols, actuators, and sensors that are networked. The project 
aims to elevate traditional greenhouse models by integrating Node -RED and MQTT 
technologies. Transitioning from a Blynk -based prototype showcases the system's 
versatility. Other key components, including NodeMCU, sensors for real -time data, and 
LED lighting, collaborate to redefine controlled environment agriculture. The Raspberry Pi 
serves as a central hub, facilitating seamless communication through Node -RED and 
MQTT. This advanced greenhouse system harmonizes cutting -edge technologies, 
showcasing a commitment to sophistication and adaptability in agricultural practices. 
Internet of Things 
Esp8266 
Smart Agriculture 
Node-Red 
MQTT  
Malaysian Journal of Science   
and 
Advanced Technology 
 
journal homepage: https://mjsat.com.my/ 
© 2024 The Authors. Published by Penteract Technology. 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC 4.0 license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).  
 
 
Received 15 March 2024 
Received in revised form  
25 March 2024 
Accepted 30 March 2024 
Available online 8 April 2024 
 
 
 
*Corresponding author: 
E-mail address: Chong Peng Lean <keith.chong@mila.edu.my>. 
https://doi.org/10.56532/mjsat.v4i2.294  
2785-8901/ © 2024 The Authors. Published by Penteract Technology. 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC 4.0 license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).  


--- page 2 ---
                                            Chong Peng Lean et al./ Malaysian Journal of Science and Advanced Technology                                                    170 
    
surrounding environment, such as sunlight, vibrations, or 
temperature differentials, to power themselves, eliminating the 
need for traditional batteries or wired power sources. This 
enables the deployment of IoT sensors in remote or hard -to-
reach locations where traditional power sources are impractical 
or unavailable, thus expanding the scope of monitoring and 
control applications [13]. Thus, IoT combination with energy 
harvesting are used for p owering sensors. In IoT applications, 
particularly in remote o r distributed environments, powering 
sensors is a crucial consideration  [14]. IoT devices often 
employ low -power microcontrollers and wireless 
communication protocols to minimize energy consumption [15-
16]. Additionally, energy -efficient design principles, such as 
duty cycling and sleep modes, are implemented to prolong 
battery life. Moreover, advancements in energy harvesting 
technologies, as mentioned earlier, further contribute to 
powering IoT sensors wi thout the need for frequent battery 
replacements or wired connections to grid for electricity [ 17-
20]. 
Hence, similar concept of using IoT for power sensors for 
greenhouse for smart monitoring is implemented.  In smart 
farming applications, IoT is utilized in greenhouse 
environments to monitor and control various factors such as 
temperature, humidity, soil moisture, and light intensity. IoT 
sensors deployed throughout the greenhouse continuously 
collect data on  environmental conditions, which is then 
transmitted to a central management system. Farmers can 
remotely monitor and adjust these conditions in real -time, 
optimizing crop growth and resource utilization. Additionally, 
IoT platforms analyze the collected data to provide insights and 
recommendations for crop management, pest control, and 
irrigation scheduling, ultimately improving productivity and 
sustainability in greenhouse farming. The greenhouse industry 
is the world's fastest expanding industry. By separating the crop 
from its surroundings, the greenhouse offers some protection 
from the direct effects of the outside weather. This makes it 
possible to cultivate crops that would not otherwise be able to 
be produced at that site. The greenhouse enclosure enables the 
manipulation of the crop environment.[21] With this asset, the 
farmer can enhance cultivation in a way that best suits the needs 
of the plants. Increased crop yield, longer production time, 
improved quality, and reduced usage of protective pesticides 
are the results.  
Research in [22] presents a study conducted to maximize 
the circumstances for plant growth, the study focuses on the 
design and implementation of a greenhouse monitoring and 
control system utilizing Node MCU ESP 8266. The writers 
stress the value of technology developments in agriculture, 
especially w hen it comes to using the internet to monitor 
greenhouses. The utilization of sensors such the LDR light 
sensor, soil moisture sensor, and DHT11 temperature and 
humidity sensor—all of which are coupled to the N ode MCU 
ESP8266 microcontroller —is also covered in the paper.  The 
project delves into creating an advanced greenhouse system, 
employing contemporary technologies like the Internet of 
Things (IoT) to enhance controlled environment agriculture. 
Greenhouses, as covered structures, furnish regulated climatic 
conditions, establishing optimal growth microenvironments for 
plants. From temperature control to carbon dioxide 
concentration, reduced pest exposure, and humidity 
management, greenhouses offer advantages o ver traditional 
outdoor farming. 
Node-RED is a free server and web GUI built on JavaScript 
that the project uses to create a reliable and secure 
communication infrastructure. Node -RED solves security and 
privacy issues by enabling greater control and ownership of 
data, in contrast to thir d-party apps. This server offers an 
adaptable and user -friendly web interface for system 
management, enabling the integration of several hardware 
components, application programming interfaces, and web 
services. 
This Internet of Things greenhouse project uses MQTT 
(Message Queuing Telemetry Transport) as its communication 
protocol, while Mosquitto acts as the MQTT broker. MQTT is 
well-known for its simple, publish/subscribe architecture, 
which makes it perfect for  effective machine -to-machine 
communication. Targeted connection inside the IoT greenhouse 
system is ensured and flawless data interchange between 
devices is made possible by the NodeMCU's MQTT 
communication with the Raspberry Pi server.  Raspbian is an 
operating system based on Linux that is tailored specifically for 
the Raspberry Pi. Raspbian contributes to the stability and 
dependability of the project by serving as the basis for hosting 
and maintaining the system components.[ 23] A progressive 
approach to greenhouse systems is represented by the 
integration of IoT technologies, such as NodeMCU, sensors, 
LED lights, Raspberry Pi, Mosquitto, and Raspbian. By 
delivering real -time monitoring, precise control, and user -
friendly experiences, this cooperative syn ergy hopes to herald 
in a new era of intelligent and flexible controlled environment 
agriculture. 
It is inherently difficult for traditional greenhouse systems 
to monitor and regulate critical environmental parameters 
including soil moisture, temperature, humidity, and light 
levels.[24] plant growth optimization is frequently hampered by 
the lack of a strong monitoring and control system, which 
results in subpar yields and resource use. the flexible and 
responsive real -time nature of conventional systems is 
insufficient to meet the cha nging and dynamic demands of 
contemporary agriculture.  By utilizing NodeMCU v3's 
capabilities, the proposed solution seeks to address these issues 
and transform greenhouse management. the traditional method 
struggles to give farmers thorough insights on the greenhouse 
environment, which hinders their ability to make wise 
judgments. by integrating NodeMCU v3, the project attempts 
to construct a sophisticated monitoring and control system that 
gives real -time data on soil moisture, temperature, humidity, 
and light levels.  In addition, the project aims to use node -red 
and MQTT to create a self -hosted iot infrastructure. concerns 
regarding data security, privacy, and personalization are raised 
by the fact that many modern greenhouse systems rely on third-
party applications. the greenhouse system's ability to adjust to 
demands and speci fications is restricted by the lack of a 
specialized and modifiable infrastructure. 
In addition to filling in the gaps in current conventional 
greenhouse systems, the small iot greenhouse system 
envisioned in this project is meant to pave the way for future 
innovations. not only are immediate problem solutions 
prioritized, but also buildin g a platform that may change with 
time. the suggested solution's essential elements of flexibility 
and upgradeability guarantee that the system will adapt to new 
developments in technology and agricultural methods.  The 
difficulties and unresolved concerns  in integrating iot 
technology in greenhouse farming are the focus of the journal 


--- page 3 ---
                                            Chong Peng Lean et al./ Malaysian Journal of Science and Advanced Technology                                                    171 
    
"a survey on enabling technologies, applications, and 
protocols." these difficulties include issues with privacy and 
security, a lack of connectivity, the layout of the sensor 
distribution network, data processing capacity, the choice of 
technology, salinity of the soil, a lack of government backing, 
expensive marketing, a large investment, and a lack of 
interoperability. the document also emphasizes the need of 
addressing both technical and non -technical barriers to enable 
the widespread adoption of iot te chnology in greenhouse 
agriculture, as well as the need for in -depth analysis and 
comprehension of the state of research in iot-based greenhouse 
farming.[25] 
A complete and cutting-edge greenhouse system that goes 
above and beyond accepted methods is the goal of the project. 
The project entails the creation of a connected greenhouse. 
Blynk is used for testing and prototyping at first, and later, a 
self-hosted s olution with Node -RED and MQTT is used for 
more customization and management. The incorporation of IoT 
technology to facilitate automation, upgradability, and real -
time monitoring is part of the scope. Enhancements in 
aesthetics, safety protocols, and thor ough documentation are 
essential elements that guarantee a safe and easy -to-use 
greenhouse setting.  
The smart global agriculture market is expected to reach 
$15.3 billion by the end of 2025.[26] Its development is greatly 
aided by new inventions and technologies such as big data, 
blockchain, machine learning, artificial intelligence (AI), data 
analytics, Internet of Things (IoT), and data analytics. [ 27-31] 
The Internet of Things (IoT) is one of the most promising 
enablers and is thought to represent a paradigm change in the 
development of smart agriculture [ 32], and it is anticipated to 
obfuscate the dis tinctions between the real and virtual worlds. 
This is accomplished by giving things (i.e., machines, gadgets, 
and objects) processing capacity and linking them so they may 
share information and communicate with one another without 
the assistance of a huma n.[33-34] The project's overarching 
goal is to showcase the possibilities of contemporary 
technologies in controlled environment agriculture by offering 
gardening lovers a flexible and advanced greenhouse system. 
An innovative approach to resolving problems in modern 
agriculture, including labour-intensive procedures, limited 
water resources, and crop vulnerability to disease, is the 
suggested Internet of Things (IoT) smart greenhouse. The 
greenhouse's advanced array of sensors and automation 
technologies allow for accurate monitoring and control of 
critical factors that are necessary to plant growth. Solar energy 
is used in conjunction with a strong battery and inverter system 
to provide sustainability and independence. Real -time data 
visualization on an intuitive webpage providing insights into 
temperature, humidity, light intensity, soil moisture, and water 
levels is made possible by the system's connectivity with the 
Internet of Things (IoT). Additionally, the addition of manual 
control functions improves responsiveness and flexibility, 
giving farmers a complete instrument to manage the challenges 
of contemporary agriculture and lessen the effects of seasonal 
changes. [35] 
 The energy -efficient features and cost savings from 
large-scale manufacture of LED lighting have attracted a lot of 
academic interest in recent years. There is a significant research 
gap in the context of horticulture, even though numerous 
studies have ex amined control technologies that optimize 
energy savings and aspects like human comfort, colo ur 
temperature, and daylight harvesting in residential and 
commercial settings. LEDs are becoming more and more 
popular in horticulture due to their energy -saving qualities, 
controllability, and compatibility with Internet of Things 
technology.  
 
Fig. 1. Overview of the testbed greenhouse environment 
It provides an adjustable lighting system with conditions 
for plant growth that can be customized, combined with Internet 
of Things technology for remote monitoring and control. With 
an emphasis on scalability, low maintainability, high flexibility, 
automation, and cheap cost, the testbed's design and 
development methodology offer a potential path forward for the 
advancement of research in intelligent LED lighting control for 
horticulture in greenhouse situations. [36] 
Farmers benefit from Automated Greenhouse Systems, 
which employ the Internet of Things (IoT) to control 
environmental conditions, including crop health assessment 
through image analysis. Two main things typically impact 
greenhouses: plant diseases and weat her patterns that cause 
productivity to decline.  The research suggests a completely 
automated greenhouse with data protection and a less expensive 
image evaluation framework for the plant disease analysis. The 
Raspberry Pi, MSP432 microcontroller, temperature, moisture, 
and humidity sensors, as well as the OpenCV image inspection 
system, make up the prototype of the suggested system. When 
predefined threshold values are reached, MCU MSP432 uses 
relays to operate the actuators and motors. The Extended Tiny 
Encryption Algorithm (XTEA) is used to provide embedded 
data security in the suggested design.  Finally, the cloud-based 
application allows the farmers to become acquainted with the 
suggested framework. The farmers can remotely assess and 
manage the ecology of their greenhouse thanks to the 
autonomous framework. [37] 
The importance of greenhouses in maximizing plant 
development conditions and raising crop yield is highlighted in 
the introduction. This project explores the idea of the Internet 
of Things, highlighting how it may be used to connect actual 
objects and make data sharing easier. It goes over current 
techniques for controlling and monitoring greenhouse 
environments, such as SMS-based systems and ZigBee module-
based wireless climate monitoring. A crucial contrast is shown 
between several communication systems, including Wi -Fi and 
SMS. They introduce the hardware components of the proposed 



--- page 4 ---
                                            Chong Peng Lean et al./ Malaysian Journal of Science and Advanced Technology                                                    172 
    
system, which include motors, sensors, and Arduino UNO. The 
integration of fuzzy logic for decision-making and the Internet 
of Things application that uses ThingSpeak as a cloud server 
are described in depth. [38] 
 Eighty percent of Vietnam's GDP comes from 
agriculture, making it one of the emerging nations. Vietnam's 
agricultural output, along with that of other agricultural nations 
worldwide, has been severely impacted by global climate 
change. Due to their physic al labor and lack of scientific 
foundation, farmers frequently squander resources during 
irrigation and fertilization, which raises unneeded expenses. 
Climate change is also causing a depletion and degradation of 
water resources, which has an impact on agricultural production 
quality. To support farmers with crop care, reduce costs, and 
boost labor productivity, the authors investigate and integrate 
technologies in agricultural production such as IoT, smart 
sensors, MQTT, intelligent pumping systems, and edge 
computing to design automati c or semi -automatic irrigation 
systems. [39] 
The article "IoT -Based Smart Agriculture Aid System 
using Raspberry Pi" offers a solution to the problems farmers 
face when trying to manage soil quality and water distribution 
in agriculture.  The authors emphasize the importance of 
agriculture as a crucial profession and the rising demand for 
fresh food production in their opening paragraph. They draw 
attention to the problems with agricultural water use and the 
demand for sustainable methods.  The proposed solution 
involves the development of an IoT-based smart agricultural aid 
system using Raspberry Pi. The system utilizes various sensors, 
including a capacitive soil moisture sensor, DHT -11 humidity 
temperature sensor, rain sensor, and pH sensor, to monitor and 
control irrigation and soil conditions. The R aspberry Pi serves 
as the central control unit, facilitating data collection, analysis, 
and remote monitoring through ThingSpeak server.[40] 
The creation of an Internet of Things -enabled, machine 
learning-module-equipped, sustainable automated greenhouse 
design is covered in the research article. Through the 
integration of IoT technologies for remote greenhouse 
monitoring and control, the suggested system seeks to increase 
the sustainability of agricultural. The two primary areas of 
emphasis for the proposed effort are energy management and 
soil and crop management. The system uses a variety of sensors 
and parts that are connected to a NodeMCU a nd Raspberry Pi 
board to monitor soil moisture, air quality, temperature, and sun 
exposure. Platforms like ThingSpeak and Blynk are utilized for 
storing and analysing the acquired data. The system also 
incorporates machine learning algorithms for irrigation control 
and soil prediction.  Finally, an approach to tracking and 
controlling soil conditions in agriculture is provided by the 
Internet of Things-enabled intelligent soil management system. 
[41] 
The goal of the study is to design a prototype smart 
greenhouse system that can use Internet of Things (IoT) 
technology to assess temperature, humidity, and soil moisture. 
The research addresses the drawbacks of standard greenhouse 
irrigation systems, including high human contact, expense, and 
water usage. To improve sustainability and energy efficiency, 
the system also includes a solar power system to deliver 
electricity to the electrical components.  The use of IoT 
technology to smart farming is covered, including temperature-
based ventilation system control in greenhouses, smart 
irrigation systems, and IoT adoption in agriculture. The 
utilization of solar energy as an alternative energy source and 
its potential to improve agricultural practices' energy efficiency 
are also included in the literature study. Additionally, it 
highlights how crucial automated agricultural systems —like 
ventilation fans and water pumps—are to maximizing resource 
efficiency and raising plant yields. [42] 
The creation of a smart environment for plant growth is 
discussed in the paper through the implementation of an 
Internet of Things -based greenhouse monitoring and 
controlling system. The system focuses on adjusting 
characteristics like as soil moisture, light intensity, temperature, 
and humidity to satisfy the individual needs of crop production.  
 
Fig. 2. System Overview [43]. 
The soil moisture sensor, LDR sensor, and DHT22 
(temperature and humidity) sensor are some of the sensors it 
uses to gather data. This data is processed and used to manage 
many factors, including motors, water pumps, exhaust systems, 
and light systems. Farmers can get real-time environmental data 
on their smartphones by connecting the system to wireless 
internet or IoT platforms such as Telegram bot, thanks to the 
NodeMCU ESP8266 module. The use of technology in 
agriculture is emphasized to address the problems caus ed by 
disease outbreaks in traditional farming methods and changing 
weather patterns to achieve effective and sustainable 
agricultural production.[43]. 
The design of an automated, smart, solar -powered 
greenhouse system is discussed in the journal with the goal of 
increasing agricultural yield in Cameroon, specifically to 
produce off -season crops. The system incorporates several 
modules, such as an Arduino  and Internet of Things (IoT) -
powered solar power system and the physicochemical 
parameters required for vegetable development. It also includes 
an Android app that allows you to monitor and analyse the 
metrics from any Wi -Fi-enabled device. In addition to  
highlighting the need of agriculture for economic growth —
especially in developing or impoverished nations —the paper 
also underlines the requirement of accuracy in agricultural 
practices to maximize productivity, lower production costs, and 
use less water. It also covers the automation of the greenhouse, 
the calibration of a pH tester for controlling fertilizer, and the 
features of the power supply, such as the quantity of solar 
panels, battery capacity, and charge controller. The advantages 
of the solar sm art and fully automated greenhouse system are 
highlighted in the study's conclusion. They also highlight the 
