

--- page 1 ---
Citation: Thwin, K.M.M.;
Horanont, T.; Phatrapornnant, T.
Machine-Learning Microclimate
Forecasting for Adaptive Equipment
Control via Web Integration in
Open-Ventilated Greenhouses.
AgriEngineering 2024, 6, 2845–2869.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
agriengineering6030165
Academic Editor: Simone Pascuzzi
Received: 19 July 2024
Revised: 8 August 2024
Accepted: 9 August 2024
Published: 13 August 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
AgriEngineering 
Article
Machine-Learning Microclimate Forecasting for
Adaptive Equipment Control via Web Integration in
Open-Ventilated Greenhouses
Kyaw Maung Maung Thwin 1, Teerayut Horanont 1,*
 and Teera Phatrapornnant 2
1 School of ICT, Sirindhorn International Institute of Technology, Thammasat University, Bangkadi Muang,
Pathum Thani 12000, Thailand; m6522040648@g.siit.tu.ac.th
2 National Electronic and Computer Technology Center, Khlong Luang District, Pathum Thani 10210, Thailand;
teera.phatrapornnant@nectec.or.th
* Correspondence: teerayut@siit.tu.ac.th
Abstract: Open-ventilated greenhouses have reasonable setup costs and low operational costs for
growers, which is crucial and most appealing for this research. These attributes fit developing nations
like Thailand and other tropical regions. It is challenging to control the equipment intended to obtain
an ideal microclimate. This research was conducted in an actual greenhouse setting for data collection
and experiments, with a proposed system for adaptive equipment control via web integration. Also,
the proposed multivariate multistep LSTM was forecasted over 1 h and cooperated with sensor data.
Additional sensors, like a leaf wetness sensor and a CO2 sensor, were installed for detecting plant-
level precision for vaporization, rather than greenhouse-level. The proposed system can optimize the
indoor temperature within 34.5 to 36 ◦C with a 39 to 40 ◦C outdoor temperature. Also, humidity was
still at the ideal level of 68 to 70%; more precisely, the wetness value was below 300 throughout the
experiment. The model accuracy achieved a sufficient RMSE (0.49) and R2 (0.9788). This proposed
system architecture and mm-LSTM model has potential as one dimension of a fully smart greenhouse
system development in open-ventilated greenhouse settings in tropical regions and Southeast Asian
nations for a better yield rate and less human interaction.
Keywords: open-ventilated greenhouse; multivariate multistep LSTM; web integration; adaptive
equipment control
1. Introduction
Greenhouses can be categorized into three main types for this research, based on their
level of enclosure and ventilation and how the greenhouse microclimate interacts with
the outside environment, which can directly impact the microclimate and suitability of
different crops [1]. Here are the details of the three categories of greenhouses. The first
is a fully enclosed greenhouse, which is enclosed entirely from the external environment
with glass, polycarbonate, or other rigid materials, for roofs and walls, to construct the
structure and embedded with environmental control systems such as air conditioning,
heating, ventilation, artificial lighting, and drip irrigation systems to maintain excellent
growing conditions throughout the plantation. This greenhouse has many advantages,
such as complete control over the microclimate environmental parameters, being more
resilient to pests and diseases, year-round production capability, protection from external
contamination, and maximizing the yield and quality of the plants by controlling the
ideal microclimate [2]. High initial investment and operational costs would be the most
significant burden for farmers and growers to set up a fully enclosed greenhouse for
practical usage [3].
Secondly, a semi-enclosed greenhouse combines the ventilation approach of a fully
enclosed greenhouse and an open-ventilated greenhouse. Microclimate control systems
AgriEngineering 2024, 6, 2845–2869. https://doi.org/10.3390/agriengineering6030165 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/agriengineering


--- page 2 ---
AgriEngineering 2024, 6 2846
integrate the mechanism of adjusting the vents and windows opening and closing to
regulate temperature and humidity, reducing the reliance on energy-intensive heating,
ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems, which is one of the essential benefits of
semi-enclosed greenhouses [4]. Technically, this type of greenhouse can act as a fully or
open-ventilated greenhouse in terms of ventilation. However, it can be easily exposed to
pest control and disease risks compared to a fully enclosed greenhouse. This greenhouse’s
disadvantages are high system complexity and maintenance of the actuator and equipment
due to the adjustable roof, windows, and equipment [5].
Thirdly, open-ventilated greenhouses are notable for their utilization of natural ventila-
tion to create natural air circulation; as required, mechanical equipment is equipped in this
greenhouse to optimize the microclimate and prevent outdoor climate dependency. The
main advantage of this open-ventilated greenhouse is a lower initial setup cost compared
to other types of greenhouses and energy efficiency, as well as minimizing the need for
mechanical cooling and ventilation by leveraging natural ventilation, which can reduce
operational costs significantly [6]. In research conducted in the literature, countries like
Thailand and other Southeast Asian nations and tropical regions can benefit from setting
up this type of greenhouse, since farmers and growers cannot afford high investments
without international funding and projects. On the other hand, the most challenging part is
climate dependency in an open-ventilated greenhouse, since natural airflow has an effect
on the microclimate of the greenhouse, so maintaining optimal growing conditions is up to
controlling the equipment. However, behaviors of dramatic changes in patterns of outdoor
climate require monitoring and intervention for equipment control.
In a South Korean fully enclosed greenhouse, temperature, humidity, and CO2 were
predicted by using three different neural network architectures, an artificial neutral net-
work, nonlinear autoregressive exogenous model, and RNN-LSTM (recurrent neutral
network–long short-term memory), and research prioritized the accuracy of the prediction
performance and thus evaluated using 5 to 30 min prediction lengths [ 7]. Likewise, an
unmentioned greenhouse-type environmental parameter prediction was researched using
GCP-LSTM and a 5 min data processing window sliding approach, and different types of
crops were experimented with [8]. In Mexico, a ventilated greenhouse experiment with
RNN-LSTM, with varying arrangements for feeding, modeled a one-hour prediction and
experimented with five different arrangements of three parameters in an even-ventilated
greenhouse. Still, none of the equipment was installed indoors [9]. Defining the setpoint
is one of the challenging things for greenhouse environmental parameters; the LightGbm
algorithm was used to determine the setpoint with the integration of Neural Language
Processing (NLP) and an expert hybrid system in a simulated greenhouse, which mimicked
the collated data from an actual greenhouse [10]. Handling multiple parameters of green-
house environmental reduction by using the Principal Component Analysis Method (PCA)
from 15 to 7 parameters, which still represented 99.19%, one researcher proposed improved
support vector regression using the parameter reducing method to make a prediction that
integrated with the PSO algorithm for optimization, where the system was used in an
experiment in tomatoes cultivated in a fully enclosed greenhouse [11].
Open-ventilated greenhouse-type temperature and humidity optimization research
was conducted in Indonesia, close to our environmental conditions. It experimented with
water spray on and off conditions without considering any machine-learning or prediction
techniques, with nozzle rotation to 60 degrees showing greater effectiveness [12].
The operational cost of a greenhouse with DDRMPC (data-driven robust model predic-
tive control) with the integration of dynamic control models is reduced by 4% compared to
conventional rule-based control [13]. Dealing with a decent humidity level was important;
it was proportional to temperature reduction in the greenhouse indoors because higher
vaporization can cause fungus and plant diseases, so the greenhouse installed the leaf
wetness sensor for more precise detection of vaporization [14]. A greenhouse farm in the
Netherlands conducted experiments in a fully enclosed greenhouse with five teams for
five smart greenhouses. The research pointed out the importance of the plants receiving


--- page 3 ---
AgriEngineering 2024, 6 2847
sufficient illumination and trimming, as well as the fact that not all additional sensors
effectively improve yield rates [15]. However, the previous research on precision green-
house systems mentioned above did not sufficiently consider open-ventilated greenhouses.
Moreover, some research was conducted on weather conditions that differed from those in
Southeast Asia.
More details on the open-ventilated type of greenhouse regarding machine-learning
applications need to be provided. This research focused on open-ventilated greenhouse
microclimate control and was conducted in Thailand, which is located in a tropical region
and is a developing nation like other Southeast Asian countries.
Open-ventilated greenhouses are quickly affected by outdoor weather conditions and
cannot fully control environmental parameters. This can lead to a decrease in yield rate and
quality unless growth is consistently monitored. Mechanical equipment like fans, water
spray, and shading were installed inside the greenhouse. Controlling this equipment was
one of the challenging factors in achieving the plant’s ideal microclimate level. That led to
significant human interaction requirements, and time spent for them could detract from
other aspects of the business or essential tasks that might be more beneficial. High humidity
and high-temperature countries like Thailand face the drawback of having unfavorable
climate conditions for indoor plantations. The main objective of this research is to address
the microclimate in the open-ventilated greenhouses to obtain the ideal temperature and
humidity by using a data-driven precision greenhouse system that handles time-series
data analysis with machine learning. Two main questions were identified as requirements:
What would be an effective way to control the actuators and equipment like fans, mists,
foggers, and others in the open-ventilated greenhouse to maintain microclimate parameters
like temperature and humidity? Which data-driven approach is best suited to control the
equipment during critical hours (daytime) on environmental parameters by integrating
with machine-learning techniques and sensor data? Possibly answering these questions
and developing the system led to this research.
This paper is arranged as follows: Section 2 explains the details of the experimental
setting in an open-ventilated greenhouse and sensors. Additionally, the architecture of
the multistep multivariate–long short-term memory (MM-LSTM) model and the data
preprocessing steps and model training are mentioned, and then, in detail, the architecture
of the greenhouse equipment control and model deployment system is discussed. Section 3
describes the entire experiment result in detail to show the mm-LSTM and the capability of
the developed system. Moreover, the evaluation results presented on the customized mm-
LSTM model are compared to the baseline mm-LSTM model with the test dataset and
unseen experimental days dataset. Section 4 discusses the experiment results as well as the
effectiveness of the proposed mm-LSTM model with the equipment control system and a
general comparison with previous findings, and Section 5 concludes on the research result
and tangibility of the proposed system, giving a brief explanation of this research method
and the requirements of innovative open-ventilated greenhouses in precision agriculture as
future work.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Experiment Setup and Data Acquisition
The experiment was set up in an open-ventilated greenhouse at the Faculty of Sci-
ence and Technology, Thammasat University, Rangsit campus, located at 14◦04′26.2′′ N
100◦36′31.8′′ E. It had six greenhouses, and one greenhouse (Figure 1) was used for this re-
search data collection and the experimental period. This research only focused on soil-based
cultivation settings in an open-ventilated greenhouse setting. However, the plantation was
not considered due to the time limitation of the research.


--- page 4 ---
AgriEngineering 2024, 6 2848
AgriEngineering 2024, 6, FOR PEER REVIEW  4 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Experimental greenhouse structure from outside. 
The greenhouse equipment included three fans on the top right side, two indoor fans 
facing each other, a 0.5 mm top spray, 0.5 mm side spray, and 0.3 mm top spray. The 0.5 
mm and 0.3 mm sizes refer to the nozzle size of the spray. Indoor temperature, humidity, 
and illumination sensors (Figure 2a) were in stalled in that greenhouse, and the sensor 
data were collected in a database. However, this sensor installation was performed by 
another organization, and additional sensors were installed for our newly developed sys-
tem, which is intended to achieve more precision. 
Additional sensors include carbon dioxide (CO2) and leaf wetness sensors. CO2 sen-
sors (Figure 2b) are an essential tool for measuring CO 2 concentrations for many crops, 
which can significantly enhance photosynthesis and encourage faster and healthier plant 
growth. Obtaining adequate CO2 can result in higher crop yields and better crop quality. 
Knowing the CO2 level indoors has the benefit of balancing the microclimate to reduce the 
risk of poor air quality and humidity levels, which are associated with causing plant dis-
eases. Moreover, consistent CO2 can contribute to uniform plant growth, promoting qual-
ity assurance of crops and commercial cultivation [16]. 
Leaf wetness sensors (Figure 3) were additionally installed to detect the presence and 
duration of vaporization on the leaf’s surface; these sensors have many advantages, such 
as the early detection of leaf surface moisture if the grower uses an irrigation method of 
spraying over the plant. These sensors can provide real-time data and prevent unneces-
sary water usage, fungi, and diseases caused by vaporization. Managing the moisture lev-
els and preventing fungi and diseases can contribute to healthier plants and higher yield 
rates, especially since some plants are not as favorable to water as others. Therefore, it is 
better to prevent over-vaporization conditions so crops can achieve better market prices 
and reduce post-harvest losses [17]. Since measuring solely relative humidity was insuffi-
cient for an open-ventilated greenhouse, precision moisture level detection at the plant 
leaf level was required. 
Figure 1. Experimental greenhouse structure from outside.
The greenhouse equipment included three fans on the top right side, two indoor fans
facing each other, a 0.5 mm top spray, 0.5 mm side spray, and 0.3 mm top spray. The 0.5 mm
and 0.3 mm sizes refer to the nozzle size of the spray. Indoor temperature, humidity, and
illumination sensors (Figure 2a) were installed in that greenhouse, and the sensor data
were collected in a database. However, this sensor installation was performed by another
organization, and additional sensors were installed for our newly developed system, which
is intended to achieve more precision.
AgriEngineering 2024, 6, FOR PEER REVIEW  5 
 
 
  
(a) ( b) 
Figure 2. Temperature, humidity, and illumination sensor (a) and CO2 sensor (b). 
  
(a) ( b) 
Figure 3. Leaf wetness sensor: (a) side view (b) front view. 
The central control unit controls all equipment used in this experiment. It is equipped 
in the greenhouse and mainly controls the equipment in two ways: via a semi-automated 
web portal and manually at the side of the greenhouse. 
Data collection was a cornerstone of the machine-learning model’s performance and 
accuracy and hugely impacted our model performance. The data collection period started 
on 22 February 2024 and ended on 1 May 2024, a total of 70 days. Parameters included the 
indoor temperature, indoor humidity, indoor illumination, indoor carbon dioxide concen-
tration, and fan and spray operation status, representing on and off operation throughout 
the data collection period. A total of 47,270 data points were collected, representing 2112 
hours in total. However, some hours were missed due to system downtime and internet 
connection interruptions during the data collection period; a total of 48 hours were 
missed, and after substruction of the missed hours, the total remaining hours were 2112. 
The average data interval was calculated by Formula (1). The averag e data interval was 
approximately 2.7 minutes. 
Figure 2. Temperature, humidity, and illumination sensor (a) and CO2 sensor (b).
Additional sensors include carbon dioxide (CO 2) and leaf wetness sensors. CO 2
sensors (Figure 2b) are an essential tool for measuring CO2 concentrations for many crops,
which can significantly enhance photosynthesis and encourage faster and healthier plant
growth. Obtaining adequate CO2 can result in higher crop yields and better crop quality.