

--- page 1 ---
arXiv:2303.06110v1  [math.OC]  10 Mar 2023
Reinforcement Learning Versus Model Predictive
Control on Greenhouse Climate Control
Bernardo Morcego 1, Wenjie Yin 1, Sjoerd Boersma 2, Eldert van Henten 3,
Vicen¸ c Puig1, Congcong Sun 3,∗
Abstract
Greenhouse is an important protected horticulture system for fe eding the world
with enough fresh food. However, to maintain an ideal growing climat e in a
greenhouse requires resources and operational costs. In orde r to achieve eco-
nomical and sustainable crop growth, eﬃcient climate control of gr eenhouse
production becomes essential. Model Predictive Control (MPC) is t he most
commonly used approach in the scientiﬁc literature for greenhouse climate con-
trol. However, with the developments of sensing and computing tec hniques,
reinforcement learning (RL) is getting increasing attention recent ly. With each
control method having its own way to state the control problem, d eﬁne control
goals, and seek for optimal control actions, MPC and RL are repre sentatives of
model-based and learning-based control approaches, respectiv ely. Although re-
searchers have applied certain forms of MPC and RL to control the greenhouse
climate, very few eﬀort has been allocated to analyze connections, diﬀerences,
pros and cons between MPC and RL either from a mathematical or pe rformance
perspective. Therefore, this paper will 1) propose MPC and RL app roaches for
greenhouse climate control in an uniﬁed framework; 2) analyze con nections and
diﬀerences between MPC and RL from a mathematical perspective; 3) compare
performance of MPC and RL in a simulation study and afterwards pre sent and
∗Corresponding email: congcong.sun@wur.nl
1Automatic Control Group (CS2AC), Universitat Polit` ecnic a de Catalunya, Spain
2Biometris Group, W ageningen University, 6700 AA W ageninge n, The Netherlands
3Agricultural Biosystems Engineering Group, W ageningen Un iversity, 6700 AA W agenin-
gen, The Netherlands
Preprint submitted to Elsevier March 13, 2023


--- page 2 ---
interpret comparative results into insights for the application of th e diﬀerent
control approaches in diﬀerent scenarios.
Keywords: Greenhouse Climate Control, Model Predictive Control,
Reinforcement Learning
2


--- page 3 ---
1. Introduction
The world population has grown drastically in recent decades. Althou gh its
growth is slowing down, it is estimated that the world population will incr ease
by 2,000 million people in the next 30 years reaching 9,700 million people in
2050 [1]. To feed this population in 2050, projections show that food produc-
tion would need to increase by 70% between 2005/07 and 2050. Prod uction
in developing countries would have to nearly double [2]. On the other ha nd,
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) declared that it is cru-
cial and urgent to render the way of land use and the agricultural p roduction
methods more eﬃcient in order to curb global warming.
All of these facts have motivated innovative production methods a nd tech-
nical solutions in the agricultural sector to improve agri-food prod uction and
increase yield per hectare. Climate controlled greenhouses, which a llows for
growing crops regardless of the outdoor environment, is one of th e important
growing methods, especially in a changing climate. To maintain proper g row-
ing climate with eﬃcient energy usage and operational cost, advanc ed control
methods of greenhouse production system (e.g. lighting, heating, CO2 dosing,
ventilation, screening, etc.) are also needed. Moreover, as the nu mber of green-
house production systems is increasing, while the number of experie nced growers
is limited, autonomous climate control of a greenhouse production s ystem is also
necessary.
Among various control methods, MPC is eﬀective to optimize a green house
production system due to its promising performance in multi-input an d multi-
output systems. However, predicting disturbances along the pre diction horizon
remins a challenging task [3, 4, 5]. The ﬁrst implementations of MPC for green-
house climate control can be traced back to the beginning of this ce ntury. The
authors in [6] illustrate that a real-time applied MPC outperforms an a dap-
tive PID controller, demonstrating its potential. MPC applications ca n also be
found in, among others, [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15]. Furtherm ore, [11] ﬁrstly
introduces a non-linear MPC incorporating energy and water consu mption to
3


--- page 4 ---
maintain climatic conditions in a greenhouse near the coast of Spain. C ompar-
ison results show that MPC can work better than set-point trackin g controller,
in some areas achieving an improvement of up to 10 times. [12] presen ts an-
other nonlinear MPC approach based on a Volterra model [16] that captures
the nonlinear relationship between ventilation and temperature. Th e proposed
nonlinear MPC is ﬁnally applied to a detailed simulation greenhouse model.
[17] also used a non-linear MPC to control the greenhouse tempera ture and its
ventilation, as well as a hybrid MPC in [18]. Besides nonlinear MPC, linear
MPC is also designed for temperature control of a greenhouse by [1 9], which
behaves much better than the conventional on-oﬀ pulse-width mo dulation con-
troller that was previously implemented. Moreover, [20] presents a tube-based
linear MPC for a greenhouse system with two-time-scale dynamics. W ith de-
velopment of sensing technology and data science, MPC tends to en ter into a
new stage where data-based techniques are integrated into cont rol design. For
instance, [5] proposes a data-driven MPC for greenhouse climate c ontrol, mainly
focusing on temperature and carbon dioxide concentration level. T he main con-
tribution of [5] is to combine a dynamical model with a data-based mod el in
order to identify uncertainties in the weather forecast. Besides o ptimization, [21]
also involved tracking performance using a hierarchical MPC improvin g energy
eﬃciency and reduction of operational costs. More precisely, a tw o layer-based
MPC structure was deﬁned, where the upper layer generates opt imal set-points
for the greenhouse climate control. The lower layer is introduced to track the
trajectories produced by the upper layer.
Recent advances in Information and Communication Technologies (I CT),
as well as artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) have motivated the usage of AI- based or
learning-based control, more speciﬁcally Reinforcement Learning ( RL), as the
key technology to transform the modern farming control mindset . Actually, the
development and application of RL has a long and well-known history (s ee [22]
and references therein). In the last two decades, several applic ations have been
published to use RL to solve real world challenges [23], where the most relevant
come from the adoption of the deep learning paradigm [24]. RL compris es a
4