

--- page 1 ---
 
 
  
 
Energies 2022, 15, 3834. https://doi.org/10.3390/en15103834 www.mdpi.com/journal/energies 
Review 
Internet of Things Approaches for Monitoring and Control of 
Smart Greenhouses in Industry 4.0 
Chiara Bersani, Carmelina Ruggiero, Roberto Sacile, Abdellatif Soussi and Enrico Zero * 
DIBRIS—Department of Informatics, Bioengineering, Robotics and Systems Engineering, University of Genoa, 
16145 Genova, Italy; chiara.bersani@unige.it (C.B.); carmel@dibris.unige.it (C.R.); roberto.sacile@unige.it (R.S.); 
s4420901@unige.it (A.S.) 
* Correspondence: enrico.zero@dibris.unige.it 
Abstract: In recent decades, climate change and a shortage of resources have brought about the need 
for technology in agriculture. Farmers have been forced to use information and innovation in com-
munication in order to enhance production efficiency and crop resilience. Systems engineering and 
information infrastructure based on the Internet of Things (IoT) are the main novel approaches that 
have generated growing interest. In agriculture, IoT solutions according to the challenges for Indus-
try 4.0 can be applied to greenhouses. Greenhouses are protected environments in which best plant 
growth can be achieved. IoT for smart greenhouses relates to sensors, devices, and information and 
communication infrastructure for real-time monitoring and data collection and processing, in order 
to efficiently control indoor parameters such as exposure to light, ventilation, humidity, tempera-
ture, and carbon dioxide level. This paper presents the current state of the art in the IoT -based ap-
plications to smart greenhouses, underlining benefits and opportunities of this technology in the 
agriculture environment. 
Keywords: Internet of Things (IoT); smart greenhouse; Industry 4.0 
 
1. Industry 4.0 and System Engineering (SE) Applications for Precision Agriculture: 
An Introduction 
Currently, we are living in the Fourth Industrial Revolution, known as “Industry 
4.0”, in which ICT -based production systems are requiring more and more integration 
and agility [1], resulting in digital matching or even in digital twins on the Internet. SE 
benefits from these new approaches in the design and analysis phases of the overall sys-
tems to tackle their complex structures. 
The digital twins architecture supports the co-optimization of the production sched-
ule, energy consumption, and cost, considering significant factors and including produc-
tion deadlines, quality grading, heating, artificial lighting, energy prices (gas and electric-
ity), and weather forecasts [2]. This work gives a new approach to vertical integration and 
optimization related to greenhouse production processes to improve energy efficiency, 
production throughput, and productivity, taking into account product quality or sustain-
ability. 
I4.0 was introduced at the Hannover Fair in 2011 in Germany, following discussions 
among representatives of industry, research, trade unions, and the state [3 –5]. The main 
objective of this initiative was not to increase production automation, but to make pro-
duction methods more intelligent through networking of machines and humans [6,7] . 
I4.0 is defined [8] as an industrial policy aiming to gain and maintain a global com-
petitive advantage in manufacturing companies. Because of investments by companies in 
information technology, supply chain coordination, automation via cyber -physical sys-
tems, embedded systems, and robotics, I4.0 is regarded as a solution for the future [9,10]. 
Its objective is to respond to a change in consumers who request personalized products, 
Citation: Bersani, C.; Ruggiero, C.; 
Sacile, R.; Soussi, A.; Zero, E.  
Internet of Things Approaches for 
Monitoring and Control of Smart 
Greenhouses in Industry 4.0. 
Energies 2022, 15, 3834. https:// 
doi.org/10.3390/en15103834 
Academic Editors: Wen-Hsien Tsai 
and Lorenzo Ricciardi Celsi 
Received: 21 April 2022 
Accepted: 19 May 2022 
Published: 23 May 2022 
Publisher’s Note:  MDPI stays 
neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations. 
 
Copyright: © 2022 by the author. Li-
censee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. 
This article is an open access article 
distributed under the terms and con-
ditions of the Creative Commons At-
tribution (CC BY) license (https://cre-
ativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 



--- page 2 ---
Energies 2022, 15, 3834 2 of 30 
 
 
forcing the industry to change its paradigms and practices and move toward personalized 
mass production [11,12]. I4.0 is mainly applied in the previous literature to collect, share, 
and analyze different types of data through network and data processing technologies, 
thus supporting decision-making processes along the entire wood supply chain [13]. 
The adoption of technological advances may lead to a significant transformation re-
lating to the quality of products, reduced time, and lower production costs [14] . 
Technological advances, such as massive data analysis algorithms [15,16] , IoT [17] , 
and cloud comput ing [18], are more and more present in industrial companies and are 
causing the emergence of new process control concepts, new service proposals, and new 
products [19,20]. 
System of Systems (SoS), Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS), Internet of Things (IoT), Ar-
tificial Intelligence (AI), blockchain technology as well as big data analytics may be re-
garded as the most important enabling technologies of I4.0 [21,22]. In these systems, tight 
monitoring and synchronization of information from all related perspectives between 
physical plants and cyberspace are achieved. Moreover, networked machines will be able 
to operate more efficiently, resiliently, and collaboratively using advanced information 
analytics. The added value of IoT application lies in improving connectivity (data, devices, 
and connectivity related services) among horizontal and vertical services such as service 
quality, service integration, telecommunication services and data management by cloud 
technology. 
I4.0, and specifically IoT, will affect a large  number of economy sectors [23]. Manu-
facturing systems are allowed to establish real-time communication, as well as intelligent 
decision making and human –machine interaction in manufacturing organizations by 
monitoring physical processes and creating “digital twins” of physical entities [24,25]. 
Currently, many sectors are already using IoT as a way to reduce costs and improve 
productivity as far as the agricultural sector is concerned [26] . Agriculture is a key factor 
for making human life sustainable for the whole world population. Agriculture allows us 
to both feed the world and to employ more than 1.5 billion people around the world [27]. 
In the context of agriculture, IoT technology represents a network of sensor systems that 
record various indicators of climate, plant, and soil conditions: moisture, nutrition, tem-
perature, pesticide level, etc. IoT-based use cases include precision agricu lture, irrigation 
control, automated drones, field mapping, and, above all, smart greenhouses.  
The agricultural sector has undergone a number of technological transformations 
over the past few decades, becoming increasingly industrialized and technology driven 
[28]. Furthermore, in this sector, IoT solutions take the form of devices connected to the 
Internet to collect environmental and mechanical measurements [29]. Farmers, by using a 
variety of smart agricultural tools, have gained more control over the breeding and grow-
ing process, making it more predictable and improving its efficiency [30] . 
IoT technologies have the potential to transform agriculture in many respects, such 
as data collection about weather conditions and soil and crop quality [31] . Furthermore, 
the ability to use these data to predict future parameters allows farmers to better plan 
production management and the consequent distribution and sales [32] . 
Connected objects may help to solve this problem by supporting farmers to produce 
more efficiently [33,34] and in a more sustainable way [35]. 
The IoT is increasingly spreading in this sector, and many innovations have already 
been adopted, as shown in the following sections. Agriculture is one of the domains that 
will be influenced by the IoT, and specifically agricultural greenhouses, which are the fo-
cus of this paper. A greenhouse is a building intended to shelter crops of ornamental, 
vegetable or fruit plants in more favorable or safer conditions than in the open air [36] . 
This structure protects the plants by climate control, which obtains  optimal conditions of 
growth or minimiz es photosynthesis, and also from  the greenhouse-effect phenomenon 
which contributes to the good growth of the plant [37]. Currently, the technology trend is 
to use wireless techniques such as IoT, which has been integrated into many fields. As a 
result, tomorrow ’s agriculture will be automated , and agricultural production will be 


--- page 3 ---
Energies 2022, 15, 3834 3 of 30 
 
 
based on the concept of intelligent agricultural greenhouses, which not only manage tem-
perature, humidity, light, and watering, but also make control and access easier.  
The installation of IoT infrastructure is capital-intensive and often translates to higher 
energy demand, which elevates the risk for climate change. A new challenge, due to high 
usage of IoT sensors and networks in the management of electronic waste, depletion of 
finite resources, and destruction of fragile ecosystems resulting in climate change , has 
been proposed [38]. 
IoT system’s energy savings are to be interpreted as greenhouses consumption opti-
mization. Recent research studies focus on these topics, for example, a novel optimization 
system focused on obtaining a trade -off between energy consumption and expected cli-
mate setting [39] . The proposed model has been tested in a  real case of study related to 
fifteen days of data collected in South Korea. Another related study focused on the total 
energy consumption and , as a consequence , to gas emission s in Turkey [40] . This work 
showed how it is possible to keep the wheat yield constant following the optimal total  
energy consumption. 
This paper aims to present the literature on current technological and methodological 
models and methods in IoT architecture for smart greenhouse applications, monitoring 
and controlling the indoor microclimatic conditions of the greenhouse, such as indoor 
temperature, CO
2, humidity, soil quality, and crop types by water and energy- saving ap-
proaches. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the IoT general 
architecture for greenhouse applications, specifically as it relates to the aspects of commu-
nication and sensors. The other sections are related to control and monitoring techniques 
in relation to specific applications. Section 3 describes the techniques used to optimize 
monitoring and control in the smart greenhouse. Section 4 describes the application of IoT 
to indoor parameters such as monitoring and control of temperature, air humidity, light 
intensity, soil features and internal or external wind speed. Section 5 describes  the appli-
cation of IoT in indoor parameters such as monitoring and control focused on CO
2 emis-
sion. Section 6 discusses the IoT application regarding monitoring and controlling soil and 
crop quality by water and energy -saving approaches. Section 7 discusses  the challenges 
and limits of IoT, and Section 8 describes the research direction. 
Although a great number of papers relate to the application of IoT in the agricultural 
sector [41,42], few literature reviews have analyzed the application of IoT technolo gies 
regarding smart agricultural greenhouses. It is intended to explore the current research 
progress and future challenges of IoT technologies for smart greenhouses and to provide 
a reference for researchers to solve current challenges. 
Generally, multisensor network technology has been applied to smart greenhouses 
[43]. Thus, the intelligent greenhouse monitoring system has been reviewed according to 
three different subsystems [44]: the monitoring subsystem for environmental perception, 
the information processing subsystem, and the communication subsystem, while the clas-
sification based on the sensor system and communication network has been tested in [45]. 
The microcontrollers and wireless connections mostly used in greenhouse automation 
have been considered [46], while IoT for crop disease detection has been addressed [47]. 
A greenhouse is a protected structure that may be covered with different kinds of 
materials and aims to  adjust the climatic growing conditions to better manage the needs 
of the plants  in order to increase the yields of the crops and to reduce production costs 
[48]. 
Our approach regarding the research paper selection is based on the main important 
parameters that are monitored and controlled in the specific context of greenhouse culti-
vation, which is microclimate indoor condition, CO 2 level, and soil and crop quality by 
energy and water saving approaches [49–54]. Moreover, as it relates to the literature, this 
review does not only list the type of available IoT solutions, it also introduces papers that 
highlight approaches in terms of adopted IoT technologies. The methodologies, control 
techniques and optimization models that have been used to improve the quality in 


--- page 4 ---
Energies 2022, 15, 3834 4 of 30 
 
 
monitoring and control for smart greenhouse are presented, comparing them in terms of 
performance. 
This work presents a systematic literature review approach using three major data-
bases, which are Google Scholar, IEEE Explore, and Scopus, for the period 2010–2021. The 
searching paper criteria is based on the TAK approach [55], according to the keyword s 
“greenhouse”, “IoT”, and “Internet of things”. Another set of papers was further consid-
ered by searching for the keywords “monitor” and “control”. Within the results, in Google 
Scholar, 461 papers were found; in Scopus, 124 papers; and in IEEE Explore , 90 papers. 
The matching of the scientific articles was carried out according to the specific context of 
greenhouses, excluding papers related to general agriculture or to  other applications not 
relevant for this review. Finally, 95 citations classified into the different categories, con-
centrated in the last 11 years, were selected. In this list, papers published between the 
2020–2021 comprise 32%, while 53% papers are dated in the period 2015–2019. 
2. IOT Architectures for Greenhouse Applications 
IoT is a technological revolution in computing and communication that has mobi-
lized the industry in recent years [56]. IoT is defined as a global network of interconnected 
services and intelligent objects of all kinds that are designed to support humans in daily 
life activities through sensing, computing, and communication capabilities [57,58] . 
The ability to observe the physical world and provide information for decision mak-
ing will be a fundamental architectural part of the Internet of the future [59,60] . These 
objects must work in a system that is beyond enterprise boundaries , which is the digital 
world [61]. IoT includes a great variety of devices a nd integrates sensors and actuators. 
These sensors and actuators are the key elements of IoT [62]. They follow the state of their 
environment and obtain information on different physical variables, e.g. , temperature, 
movement, position [63], and forming a complex network [64], and they are generally 
composed of a potentially large number of nodes [65]. 
Sensors collect information present in the environment to enrich the functionalities 
of devices [66]. They are becoming smaller and smaller and are therefore more easily in-
tegrated into objects [34]. Seventy-five billion IoT devices will be connected to the Internet 
by 2025 [27]. 
IoT relates to the network, data and new services [67] and relates to various technical 
solutions, RFID, TCP/IP, mobile technologies, etc. that identify objects and capture, store, 
process, and transfer data in physical environments and between physical contexts and 
virtual worlds [68,69]. 
IoT is composed of a heterogeneous set of networks that support the communication 
of these objects [70]. LPWA networks are emerging, with LoRa and SIGFOX in particular 
[71]. These are long -range, low-speed networks that are entirely dedicated to communi-
cations between objects. Other technologies are also used, such as Narrow Band or LTE-
m [72]. Figure 1 shows an IoT architecture diagram for greenhouse applications in smart 
agriculture. 