

--- page 1 ---
Academic Editors: Dong Sub Kim,
Sunghyun Yoon and Young-Yeol Cho
Received: 28 October 2025
Revised: 25 November 2025
Accepted: 25 November 2025
Published: 27 November 2025
Citation: Choi, W.-J.; Yang, M.
Probabilistic Deep Learning
Framework for Greenhouse
Microclimate Prediction with
Time-Varying Uncertainty and
Covariance Analysis. Agriculture 2025,
15, 2461. https://doi.org/10.3390/
agriculture15232461
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Article
Probabilistic Deep Learning Framework for Greenhouse
Microclimate Prediction with Time-Varying Uncertainty and
Covariance Analysis
Woo-Joo Choi 1
 and Myongkyoon Yang 2,3, *
1 Department of Agricultural Machinery Engineering, Jeonbuk National University,
Jeonju 54896, Republic of Korea; ujuchoe79@jbnu.ac.kr
2 Department of Bioindustrial Machinery Engineering, Jeonbuk National University,
Jeonju 54896, Republic of Korea
3 Institute pf Agricultural Machinery & ICT Convergence, Jeonbuk National University,
Jeonju 54896, Republic of Korea
* Correspondence: yangmk@jbnu.ac.kr
Abstract
Although greenhouse microclimates typically exhibit gradual and near-linear transitions,
abrupt fluctuations in external weather conditions and actuator operations introduce
nonlinear dynamics that complicate accurate interpretation and prediction. Predicting
greenhouse microclimate is a key element for achieving stable and energy efficient crop
production, particularly in strawberry greenhouse. However, existing greenhouse microcli-
mate deterministic prediction models do not adequately reflect the nonlinear, time-varying
characteristics of greenhouses and the inherent uncertainty in data, limiting probabilistic
decision-making. In this study, we developed a probabilistic deep learning framework
to estimate and interpret uncertainty while simultaneously predicting greenhouse mi-
croclimate quantitatively. The proposed one-dimensional convolutional neural network
model learned the time-series characteristics of greenhouse internal and external envi-
ronmental information and control data, predicting a total of nine parameters, including
three-dimensional predicted values 3 h later and six-dimensional covariance elements. The
model demonstrated high sharpness and calibration performance, with an average R2 of
0.93, a negative log likelihood of 2.08, and a Coverage 90% of 0.901 for three microclimates.
In addition, the estimated covariance matrix was used to interpret the time-varying cor-
relations between microclimate variables, confirming local simultaneous variability not
captured by global correlation analysis. These results suggest that the model in this study
can provide greenhouse operators with explainable uncertainty interpretation and robust
control decision support information.
Keywords: covariance prediction; greenhouse microclimate; prediction uncertainty;
probabilistic deep learning model; time-varying correlation
1. Introduction
The stable production of high-quality and high-yield crops is achieved through the
optimization of greenhouse environmental control decisions [ 1]. Such optimization is
based on a foundation of empirically accumulated experience and experimentally validated
knowledge, enabling growers to achieve both high productivity and enhanced energy
efficiency [2]. Decision-making for environmental control relies on predicting fluctuations
Agriculture 2025, 15, 2461 https://doi.org/10.3390/agriculture15232461


--- page 2 ---
Agriculture 2025, 15, 2461 2 of 15
within the greenhouse microclimate while simultaneously integrating the effects of external
weather conditions and the operation of control devices [3].
Advances in computing resources and deep learning algorithms have enabled mul-
tidimensional data analysis techniques to predict greenhouse microclimate [4,5]. To pre-
dict time-series changes in greenhouse microclimate for optimal growth conditions, re-
search has focused on using deep learning models to learn from the external environ-
ment, the operating status of greenhouse control actuators, and time-series changes in
greenhouse microclimate [6,7]. Furthermore, research has been conducted to implement
real-time prediction-control loop optimization and incorporate safety constraints by ap-
plying learning-based model predictive control techniques that utilize predictions from
learned models [8,9]. Previous research has focused on improving energy efficiency and
reducing microclimate constraint violations during greenhouse actuator operation by ap-
plying state-of-the-art algorithms [10,11]. However, existing control loop implementation
studies often utilize deterministic predictive models, which fail to accurately reflect the
non-linearities and uncertainties associated with internal climate changes within the green-
house. This limits probability-based decision-making, thereby reducing the validity of
control implementation.
Microclimate change, external disturbances, actuator execution, and crop physiologi-
cal responses within a greenhouse exhibit nonlinear relationships with multidimensional
time-varying properties; therefore, changes in feature patterns at each point in time within
the system (e.g., cultivation environment and seasonal transitions) significantly affect the
reliability of deterministic predictions [12,13]. Furthermore, real-world greenhouse envi-
ronments inevitably contain significant noise, such as sensor inaccuracy and missing data.
Since most artificial intelligence models are highly dependent on the data they use, models
with blackbox characteristics have a risk of being uninterpretable. Therefore, to build a
model for real-time greenhouse control decision-making with guaranteed robustness, it
is essential to analyze the uncertainty and prediction reliability of quantitative models
over time, as well as the deterministic prediction. However, its application in agriculture,
especially in microclimate prediction, is limited.
This study proposes a method for predicting greenhouse microclimate, including
internal temperature, relative humidity, and CO2 concentration, three hours later, using a
probabilistic deep learning model. This approach simultaneously analyzes uncertainty and
model reliability through time-varying covariance output. Model training to output three
microclimate predictions and time-varying covariances relied on the negative log likelihood
(NLL) loss function. These covariances enable the quantitative calculation of uncertainty
and model reliability, thereby assessing sharpness and calibration. The performance of
the probabilistic model was validated using a deterministic model commonly used in
previous studies.
The main contributions of this study are summarized as follows:
- Building a probabilistic deep neural network for the temporal projection of impor-
tant greenhouse microclimate variables (internal temperature, relative humidity, and
CO2 concentration).
- Integration of an NLL training objective enabling concurrent generation of projections
and temporal covariance, thereby encoding model variability
- Deriving model variability and dependence between nonlinear variables through
temporal covariance analysis using Cholesky factorization.
- Introducing analytical methods to quantify the variability and reliability of network
output and support the assessment of predictive reliability and resilience.


--- page 3 ---
Agriculture 2025, 15, 2461 3 of 15
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Data Acquisition and Preprocessing
Greenhouse microclimate, external environment, and control data, all of which were
sourced from public datasets provided by the Korea Institute of Agriculture Technol-
ogy Promotion Agency, were collected from a smart strawberry greenhouse in Nonsan,
Chungcheongnam-do, Republic of Korea, from 21 September 2023 to 26 April 2024. During
this period, the strawberry crop underwent a single cultivation cycle from transplanting to
the fifth inflorescence stage. At the same time, we collected the following information from
the commercial greenhouse control system and environmental sensors: The greenhouse
microclimate dataset included hourly measurements of internal temperature, internal
relative humidity, and CO2 concentration. The external environment dataset comprised
hourly observations of external temperature, external relative humidity, precipitation, wind
speed, wind direction, solar radiation, snowfall, and ground temperature. The control
dataset consisted of 1 min interval recordings of window and curtain opening statuses.
In addition, the labels “01–04” for each actuator (Up window, Side window, and Curtain)
denote the indices of independently operating units located within the greenhouse. In
other words, each actuator functions independently across four separate zones. The overall
data distribution is summarized in Table 1.
Table 1. Types, measurement ranges and number of outliers of the collected greenhouse microclimate,
external environment, and control data. The range of each variable represents its temporal variability
and the operational range of the corresponding sensors.
Factor Values Outlier
Internal temperature (◦C) 2.75 to 32.67 18
Internal relative humidity (%) 28.92 to 99.33 37
Internal CO2 concentration (ppm) 120.5 to 671 23
External temperature (◦C) −10.4 to 28.3 11
External relative humidity (%) 16 to 100 17
Precipitation (mm) 0 to 45.3 0
Wind speed (m/s) 0 to 6.7 9
Wind direction (◦) 0 to 360 0
Radiation (W/m2) 0 to 850.83 39
Snowfall (cm) 0 to 5.7 0
Ground temperature (◦C) −8 to 42.7 23
Up window (left, right—01 to 04) (%) 0, 50, 100 0
Side window (left, right—01 to 04) (%) 0, 50, 100 0
Curtain (up, down, left, right—01 to 04) (%) 0, 50, 100 0
The collected data contained numerous missing values and outliers, and the sampling
intervals varied. Therefore, preprocessing was performed to address these issues. Unre-
ceived data in the microclimate and external environmental variables were observed for
precipitation and snowfall, with proportions of 94% and 98%, respectively. This occurs
when the sensors did not collect information for each meteorological environment. Further-
more, since the sensitivity of each sensor is 0.1 mm and 0.1 cm, respectively, missing data
may be collected when meteorological conditions fall below these values. However, in this
case, the impact on the greenhouse interior environment is minimal, and assuming that
multivariate analysis of other external meteorological data can account for this, all missing
data were replaced with zero. For the control data, an average of 3% of missing data was
present, which occurred when the system was not activated and thus could not receive
data. This was handled by interpolating data values prior to the missing gaps using the
“forward fill” method.


--- page 4 ---
Agriculture 2025, 15, 2461 4 of 15
To unify the time scale of the whole dataset, the datasets were then resampled to
an hourly basis based on the mean. Sensors occasionally recorded outlier values due to
physical operational errors of the devices (for example, an internal CO2 concentration of
5 ppm). To detect such outliers, both microclimate and external environment data were
decomposed using seasonal-trend decomposition with a 24 h cycle. Residuals obtained
after removing trend and seasonality were considered outliers when they deviated from the
mean by more than five standard deviations, and their number is shown in Table 1. These
outlier values were removed and subsequently interpolated using the “linear” method.
Seasonal characteristics are crucial for model learning because they significantly influ-
ence the temporal variability and correlation of greenhouse microclimate [14]. To preserve
the cyclicality of temporal variables and learn periodic patterns, variables for time, day of
the week, and month were normalized by the length of their respective cycles and then
expanded into a two-dimensional representation using sine and cosine transforms [15]. The
pre-processed and computed data were integrated into a time-series dataset consisting of
45 features, and the data were split along the temporal axis into training and validation sets;
all 45 feature sequences were then used as inputs for learning the deep-learning model.
To train the deep learning model, input–output datasets were constructed (Figure 1).
The input data consisted of time-series vectors containing 45 features, representing con-
tinuous values of length W from a specific time point T. W used input sequence lengths
of 6 H, 12 H, and 24 H, and trained the model for each length and optimized it through
evaluation and comparison. The output data were defined as the greenhouse microclimate
variables three hours after time T. All input–output datasets were normalized across the
45 features using Min–Max scaling and repeatedly applied to the entire time-series interval
through a sliding window approach. The probabilistic deep learning model in this study
primarily aimed to explore short-term patterns based on a sliding window and learn about
time-varying uncertainty and correlations. Furthermore, the input and output dataset
samples were generated using sliding windows and these are independent observation
units at each point in time, preventing leakage of future information from sample units.
Therefore, the random shuffling and partitioning in this study did not damage the overall
time series structure and limited the risk of temporal leakage. This allowed the model
to learn generalized temporal patterns without direct future information. Afterwards, to
ensure the reproducibility of model learning, five random numbers (3, 141, 4755, 94,955,
240,707) were selected, and used as the random of dataset shuffling and the global random
seed of tensorflow 2.11 (Google, Mountain View, CA, USA) and python. The dataset was
then partitioned into training, validation, and testing groups at a ratio of 0.72:0.18:0.1.
Figure 1. Schematic overview of the input–output dataset construction based on the sliding window
method using the collected time-series greenhouse internal, external environmental, and control
data. The sliding window method was employed to construct training datasets for predicting future
microclimate time-varying characteristic variables from past input sequences of internal environment,
external environment data, and control with length of W.