

--- page 1 ---
Citation: Ghaderi, M.; Reddick, C.;
Sorin, M. A Systematic Heat
Recovery Approach for Designing
Integrated Heating, Cooling, and
Ventilation Systems for Greenhouses.
Energies 2023, 16, 5493. https://
doi.org/10.3390/en16145493
Academic Editors: Yuehong Su,
Jae-Weon Jeong, Jingyu Cao,
Devrim Aydin, Michele Bottarelli
and Carlos Jimenez-Bescos
Received: 22 June 2023
Revised: 12 July 2023
Accepted: 18 July 2023
Published: 20 July 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
energies
Article
A Systematic Heat Recovery Approach for Designing Integrated
Heating, Cooling, and Ventilation Systems for Greenhouses
Mohsen Ghaderi, Christopher Reddick and Mikhail Sorin *
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Université de Sherbrooke, 2500 Boul. de l’ Université,
Sherbrooke, QC J1K 2R1, Canada; gham2203@usherbrooke.ca (M.G.); j.christopher.reddick@usherbrooke.ca (C.R.)
* Correspondence: mikhail.v.sorin@usherbrooke.ca
Abstract: Ventilation heat loss is one of the most important factors contributing to energy performance
of greenhouses. This paper suggests a systematic method based on dynamic pinch analysis (PA)
to design an integrated heating, cooling, and ventilation system that uses ventilation waste heat in
a cost-effective and energy efﬁcient way. A heat recovery system including an air handling unit,
borehole thermal storage, and a heat pump is proposed to investigate all heat integration scenarios
for an entire year. In the ﬁrst step, the heat integration scenarios are reduced to a few typical days
using a clustering technique. Then, a generic methodology for designing a heat exchanger network
(HEN) for a dynamic system, ensuring both direct and indirect heat recovery, is presented and a set
of HENs are designed according to the conditions of typical days. Afterwards, the best HEN design
is selected among all design alternatives using a techno-economic analysis. The whole procedure
is applied to a commercial greenhouse and the best HEN conﬁguration and required equipment
sizes are calculated. It is shown that the best-performing design for the greenhouse under study
produces primary energy savings of 57%, resulting in the shortest payback period of 9.5 years among
all design alternatives.
Keywords: greenhouse; pinch analysis; heat exchanger network; clustering; techno-economic
1. Introduction
As demand for greenhouse agriculture continues to grow, reducing the associated
energy cost has become a major challenge. The greenhouse industry is an energy-intensive
sector and the energy cost can be as high as 70–85% of the total operating cost in a typical
greenhouse [1]. The primary reason for this is the signiﬁcant climate control energy demand
accounting for up to 90% of the total energy requirements [2]. The high energy consumption
is mostly due to the energy losses associated with inefﬁcient practices for maintaining
greenhouse cultivation conditions. Currently, natural ventilation through opening the roof
vents is common practice to control the humidity level inside greenhouses. However, this
incurs signiﬁcant heat loss from greenhouses during the heating season and is among
the biggest challenges in greenhouse energy management, particularly in cold regions [3].
Excessive heat loss can be partially mitigated through forced/mechanical ventilation by
removing undesired energy exchange due to the lack of control over the airﬂows in natural
ventilation. However, mechanical ventilation introduces an extra energy cost due to the
electricity consumption of fans, and as a result, a combination system of forced ventilation
and natural ventilation would offer the most economically viable solution [4,5].
In addition, heat recovery systems, which can capture and reuse heat from ventilation
air, can be an effective strategy in reducing energy consumption. Various technical options
exist for recovering thermal energy from ventilation systems, which can be categorized
into two main groups: passive and active recovery systems. Passive systems refer to
different conﬁgurations of air-to-air heat exchangers (AHXs), enabling direct heat recovery
without any need for an external device such as a heat pump. The utilization of AHXs
Energies 2023, 16, 5493. https://doi.org/10.3390/en16145493 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/energies


--- page 2 ---
Energies 2023, 16, 5493 2 of 22
in greenhouse ventilation systems has proven to provide considerable energy efﬁciency
beneﬁts. Coomans et al. [ 6] compared a semi-closed greenhouse equipped with a recu-
peration stage with a naturally ventilated greenhouse. It was observed that employing a
heat recovery device enhances the energy efﬁciency of the greenhouse by 28%. Maslak [7]
studied the energy saving potential of a non-hygroscopic rotary air-to-air heat exchanger
for a tomato greenhouse and a 17% energy efﬁciency improvement was achieved. Rousse
et al. [3] investigated the performance of a low-cost air-to-air heat exchanger unit for a
greenhouse located in Quebec. It was shown that the application of multi-pipe counterﬂow
heat exchangers is favorable in small scale within the range of 0.5–1 ACH.
On the other hand, in an active recovery system, heat recovery is conducted through a
thermal cycle created by a heat pump. The exhaust air heat pump (EAHP) is increasingly
gaining popularity as an innovative technology in modern ventilation systems. In an EAHP ,
heat is recovered from the warm exhausted air by an evaporator and is delivered to a
condenser to preheat the supply air during winter. Currently, EAHPs are being widely
used in many energy efﬁcient buildings and are used in almost all newly built family
houses in Europe [8]. However, due to the limited capacity of EAHPs, auxiliary devices
are often needed to maximize heat recovery potential [ 9]. Li et al. [ 10] evaluated the
performance of an AHX coupled with an EAHP under different climatic conditions. It was
concluded that the integration of an AHX always reduces the annual energy consumption
of the heating, cooling, and air conditioning (HVAC) system. Perone et al. [11] introduced
and optimized the heating performance of a prototype forced ventilation system using a
combination AHX/heat pump for a greenhouse. The results showed superior performance
of the system in terms of energy efﬁciency and temperature control in the greenhouse.
Shuailing Liu et al. [12] proposed a more complex integrated system that incorporates both
a pump-driven loop heat pipe and an EAHP to improve energy efﬁciency in cold regions.
The temperature effectiveness of the integrated system was calculated to be 52.9% higher
than that of the heat pump alone. A comprehensive literature review reveals that existing
heat recovery technologies are primarily based on direct heat recovery, and indirect heat
recovery through thermal energy storage is completely overlooked, which prevents the
whole heat recovery potential from being fully realized. In addition, current studies on heat
recovery predominantly concentrate on analyzing heat recovery devices and there is a lack
of a comprehensive and systematic approach for sizing and designing the conﬁguration of
the heat recovery system, especially in more complex units.
The heat integration technique based on pinch analysis (PA) has been a well-established
method in the process industry for many years for designing and optimizing heat recovery
systems [13]. In general, a PA problem starts with an energy targeting phase to determine
the maximum heat recovery possible and is followed by matching an optimal heat ex-
changer network (HEN) that connects heat sources and sinks in the most energy efﬁcient
way. In recent years, some attempts have been made to extend the applicability of the
pinch-based design approach to HVAC systems. For example, in the study by Miseviciute
et al. [14], PA was employed to analyze and redesign the HEN of a building’s ventilation
system. It was demonstrated that the building’s energy demand could be reduced by
approximately 26% through heat integration compared to the reference system without
heat recovery. Reddick et al. [15] further developed this idea by using steady-state pinch
analysis to integrate waste heat into a building’s heating system. However, the impact
of dynamic behavior of the waste heat source, and ever-changing temperature values,
were not reﬂected in this study, which could raise serious questions about the relevance
of the steady-state pinch method for such applications. Hosseinnia et al. [ 16] proposed
a dynamic pinch strategy that uses instantaneous energy targeting to handle changes in
the heat capacity of waste heat and other renewable sources. Dynamic PA also allows for
integration scenarios using thermal energy storage by accounting for charging/discharging
timing. This method was successfully applied to the integration of gray water waste heat,
and sizing a hybrid solar-assisted heat pump with seasonal heat storage for a residential
building [17].


--- page 3 ---
Energies 2023, 16, 5493 3 of 22
Given the fact that any temperature change in heat sources and sinks (hot/cold
streams) can alter the HEN structure, designing a HEN to completely meet dynamic energy
targets is not a trivial task. Superstructure-based mathematical programming is a widely
used approach for HEN design. However, the superstructure, which represents all potential
matches between hot and cold streams, may introduce a huge number of variables for a
dynamic system, making this method complex and impractical for dynamic heat integration.
Therefore, a simple yet effective HEN design method is required to consider the variability
in temperatures and heat capacities of the streams.
The present paper presents a heuristic method to design a cost-efﬁcient HEN for a set
of dynamic streams. This generic method is then applied to a case study greenhouse to
design an integrated climate conditioning system enabling ventilation waste heat recovery.
This study is a continuation of our previous work [ 18] in which heat integration was
successfully accomplished by deﬁning the greenhouse heating, cooling, and ventilation
systems as a set of streams. A clustering technique, as the cornerstone of the method, was
proposed to limit the problem size from a year to a few typical days. This paper addresses
the HEN design problem for the obtained typical time periods and discusses the selection
criteria of the best conﬁguration of an integrated greenhouse climate conditioning system.
Furthermore, the key techno-economic aspects and potential proﬁtability of different heat
integration schemes based on different typical seasonal weather conditions of a year are
examined. To the best of our knowledge, this is the very ﬁrst attempt to apply dynamic
PA for the design of greenhouse climate conditioning systems. This innovative approach
opens up new possibilities for designing greenhouses that effectively utilize and harness
the extremely dynamic ventilation waste heat. Aside from novelty in application, this
paper presents a generic heuristic method for identifying the most efﬁcient and economical
heat integration scenario, maximizing heat recovery and minimizing total cost for any
dynamic energy system. Furthermore, the proposed method is more easily applicable
and practical for determining equipment sizes and the HEN conﬁguration than complex
superstructure-based mathematical programming. This research lays the foundation for
future advancements in greenhouse design and highlights the potential of dynamic PA as a
valuable tool in ﬁnding sustainable and energy-efﬁcient design alternatives.
2. Case Study Description
A 1125 m 2 four-span commercial greenhouse located in Saskatoon is selected as a
case study [19]. In the original design, which is referred to as the reference case hereafter,
the greenhouse heating is supplied by a natural gas (NG) boiler connected to a heating
distribution circuit including a set of fan coil units (FCU loop). Furthermore, the cooling and
dehumidiﬁcation loads are met through air exchange by natural ventilation. In the present
study, the feasibility of enhancing the reference climate control system’s performance by
integrating ventilation waste heat is examined. The basic idea is to integrate the natural
ventilation system with a mechanical ventilation system equipped with a heat recovery
heat pump and heat storage. So, the proposed system is composed of (1) an air handling
unit (AHU) to accommodate an efﬁcient heat exchanger network to collect the ventilation
waste heat, (2) borehole thermal energy storage (BTES) that acts as seasonal energy storage,
allowing the waste heat to be stored during the warmer months and then used during
the colder months, and ﬁnally, (3) a heat pump. Figure 1 shows the streams representing
the suggested system annotated from 1 to 10 and the potential heat integration schemes
in greenhouse heating and cooling modes. A detailed description of the streams can be
found in our previous work [ 18] and is not reiterated here. Table 1 brieﬂy presents the
speciﬁcations of all streams in the system, including the source and target temperatures, as
well as the heat capacity (CP =
.
m·cp) for each stream. Note that the streams associated with
the water ﬂow passing through the FCUs and the air passing over the coils (streams 9 and
10) are excluded from analysis since they are already matched via fan coil heat exchangers
and cannot be integrated in any other way (see Figure 1). Similarly, the water/glycol
mixture ﬂow supplied to the boreholes (stream 8) is disregarded (this stream can only


--- page 4 ---
Energies 2023, 16, 5493 4 of 22
exchange heat with the ground through borehole heat exchangers). The returning ﬂow
from boreholes are represented by two non-coexisting streams depending on whether the
boreholes are charging (stream 5) or discharging (stream 6) since the working temperature
of the BTES is different in heating and cooling modes (see Table 1). Furthermore, “hot and
cold utilities” are supplied by a natural gas boiler and natural ventilation, respectively.
Figure 1. Schematic of heat integration schemes of the proposed climate conditioning systems for
the greenhouse (red and blue colors are used for heating and cooling and gray arrows represent
the streams).
Table 1. Stream properties.
No. Stream Name Description Hot/Cold Fluid T s (◦C) T t (◦C) CP (kW/ ◦C)
1 HP_Cond refrigerant ﬂow passing
through the condenser of HP H R152a 78.7 45 constant
2 HP_Eva refrigerant ﬂow passing
through the evaporator of HP C R152a −10 −5 constant
3 Supply air airﬂow delivered to the
greenhouse using AHU H/C air T out TAHU dynamic
4 Exhaust air airﬂow rejected from the
greenhouse using AHU H air T in Tout dynamic
5 BTES ch
BTES return ﬂow during
BTES charging (cooling mode) C water/glycol 10 15 dynamic
6 BTES d
BTES return ﬂow during BTES
discharging (heating mode) H water/glycol 0 −5 dynamic
7 Heating loop FCU loop return ﬂow C water 30 40 dynamic
3. Methodology
Figure 2 shows the overview of the design methodology, which is structured into four
sequential steps, namely, data preparation, energy targeting, HEN design, and techno-
economic analysis. This work is a sequel to our previous study [18] in which the former
two steps were discussed in detail. In summary, to begin with, the required input data
to fully deﬁne the streams listed in Table 1 (i.e., hourly thermal loads, ventilation rate,
relative humidity, and temperature proﬁles) were generated using a greenhouse climate
model. Then, dynamic PA was introduced by dividing the total time into smaller time
intervals in which steady-state conditions could be achieved. So, the energy targeting was
performed by constructing composite curves (CCs) based on the collected data on an hourly
scale to provide sufﬁcient temporal resolution to capture key characteristics in proﬁles of


--- page 5 ---
Energies 2023, 16, 5493 5 of 22
temperatures and heat capacities. Furthermore, in order to reduce the data to a manageable
size, the input data were clustered into a number of groups (i.e., 10 clusters plus two
extreme heating/cooling days) containing similar days in terms of daily patterns of thermal
loads. For each cluster, a “typical day” (TD), which is the most representative day of the
cluster (i.e., centroid of the cluster), was selected and a weight was assigned denoting
the number of days in the cluster. In fact, by using typical days, the heat integration
problem has been successfully limited to only a few typical scenarios that are repeated
during the year. It should be mentioned that the detailed description of the clustering
process, including ﬁnding the optimum number of typical days, accuracy of clustering,
and algorithm selection have already been discussed [ 18] and are not reiterated here.
Furthermore, to facilitate interpretation of the results in this study, all chosen typical days
are categorized into three main climatic conditions. TD1 to TD4 represent “very cold” days
(no cooling) of the year, which are typical of winter days. TD5, 6, 8, and 9 are typical fall or
spring days with cold nights and relatively warm days, which are labelled as “mild-cold”
days. Finally, TD7, 10, 11, and 12 describe “warm” days of the year. Figure 3 shows the
selected typical days and corresponding typical climates for the greenhouse under study.
Figure 2. Design methodology structure (the non-colored sections were discussed in our previous
paper [18]).
This work is built on the energy targeting results derived from the composite curves
for the selected typical days. First, a step-by-step approach to design, combine, and merge
all hourly-based HENs into a few HEN structures corresponding to the available typical
days is described. Once the HEN structures are set for all TDs, the equipment sizing
is carried out. Then, a holistic techno-economic analysis is performed to ﬁnd the best
design conﬁguration for the greenhouse climate conditioning system. The present method
not only provides a practical method to design a cost-effective HEN representing the
best interconnection of system components, but also determines the equipment size and
supports the decision-making process for the selection of climate control technologies for
the greenhouse. In particular, the mechanical/natural ventilation ratio, electriﬁcation ratio
of the reference system (i.e., HP/NG boiler capacity ratio), the structure of hybrid multi-
source HP , and the required BTES size are the most important outcomes that can be directly


--- page 6 ---
Energies 2023, 16, 5493 6 of 22
achieved from the proposed method without any need for complex and time-consuming
superstructure-based mathematical programming. While the proposed methodology does
not guarantee the global optimum for the HEN due to the heuristics involved, it could
provide a promising solution by selecting one of the best local optimums among all those
calculated for the most repetitive typical scenarios (i.e., TDs) in a year.
Figure 3. Selected typical days, their associated weights, and corresponding typical climates; blue
color shows the typical winter days, light blue shows the typical mild-cold climate (transition days),
and red color denotes the typical warm days [18].
3.1. HEN Design Strategy
The procedure of HEN design in this study is adapted from the general method
used for batch process HEN synthesis [ 20]. In fact, each typical day is considered as a
batch period with 24 equally sized time intervals. For each hour, a subnetwork, which
is a heat exchanger network for that particular hour of the day, is designed based on
the conventional grid diagram in which hot/cold stream matching is conducted using
basic PA principles including CP inequality, stream splitting, and avoiding cross pinch
heat transfer [21]. Once the hourly grid diagrams are built, the sizes of the various heat
exchangers must be determined using the logarithmic mean temperature difference (LMTD)
method. According to this method, the total heat transfer area for a given heat exchanger
can be calculated as follows:
A = Q
U∆TLMTD
(
m2
)
(1)
where Q and ∆TLMTD represent the thermal duty and logarithmic mean temperature
difference (LMTD) of the heat exchanger and can be extracted from grid diagrams. U is
the overall heat transfer coefﬁcient and is highly dependent on the type and geometric
parameters of the heat exchanger. In the present study, three different heat exchanger types
are involved: ﬁnned tube heat exchangers for air/water matches, corrugated plate heat
exchangers for AHX, and plate heat exchangers for the evaporator and condenser of the
HP . Accordingly, different thermal models have been developed to calculate theU value
based on the heat exchanger type. The elaborate description of the mathematical modeling
for the different types of heat exchangers under investigation is given in Appendix A.
Finally, the overall heat exchanger network for each TD is made up by the combination
of the corresponding subnetworks. It should be noticed that there might be some heat
exchangers connecting the same stream pair in different subnetworks of a day. In this
case, the largest area of all the shared heat exchangers in the subnetworks of the day is
selected for the area size. As a result, there are 12 potential HEN designs corresponding
to 12 typical days (including the hottest and coldest days of the year, i.e., TD1 and TD12)


--- page 7 ---
Energies 2023, 16, 5493 7 of 22
maximizing heat recovery for their respective cluster. In the following section, the process
of sizing the system components fulﬁlling the HEN requirements for each typical scenario
will be described.
3.2. Equipment Sizing
For each TD, the HP is sized to supply the corresponding heating load entirely. As a
result, no extra hot utility is required for all days of the cluster for which the HP is sized. So,
the condenser capacity, evaporator capacity, and compressor nominal power consumption
are calculated as follows:
∀TD
.
Q
Design
Cond = ∑24
h=1
.
Q
Load
h
HP working hours (2)
∀TD
.
W
Design
comp =
.
Q
Design
Cond /COP (3)
∀TD
.
Q
Design
Eva =
.
Q
Design
Cond −
.
W
Design
comp (4)
The buffer tank is sized based on the worst-case scenario for the coldest day of the year
(TD1). The details of HP cycle design and condenser-buffer tank matching were described
in detail in the energy targeting phase in an earlier publication [18]. Knowing the heating
capacity of the HP , the natural gas boiler capacity can be simply derived by subtracting the
HP heating capacity from that of TD1 in which the HP is sized based on the coldest day of
the year (i.e., HP-only scenario).
∀TD
.
Q
Design
Boiler =
.
Q
Design ,TD1
Cond −
.
Q
Design ,TD
Cond (5)
3.3. BTES Sizing
The BTES sizing is based on the well-known ASHRAE/Kavanaugh model [22]. This
model calculates the total borehole length using the following equation:
L = QaRga + Qeva
(
Rb + PLF mRgm + FscRgst
)
Tg− Twi +Two
2 + Tp
(6)
where Rb, Rga, and Rgst are the ground thermal resistances per unit length. PLF denotes
the part-load factor during the heating month; Tg is the undisturbed ground temperature,
which is 5◦C for the greenhouse location; Qa and Qeva represent the net annual average
heat transfer to the ground and evaporator capacity, respectively.Twi, Two are the inlet and
outlet borehole temperatures at design conditions. Finally, Tp represents the long-term
ground temperature penalty caused by ground heat transfer imbalances. According to this
equation, the heat imbalance during charging/discharging of the BTES can affect Qa and
Tp, which result in a larger BTES. Therefore, direct charging of the BTES through ventilation
heat may improve the thermal balance and allow a smaller BTES to be selected. It also
substantially reduces the electricity consumption required for active charging of the BTES
using the HP .
The previous equation is used to determine the appropriate BTES size for all 12 pro-
posed HEN conﬁgurations. To do so, the ﬁrst step is to calculate the net annual average
heat transfer to the ground, Qa. Hence, given the HENs’ layouts and the size of all heat ex-
changers, dynamic modeling of the HEN is performed for all scenarios using the Simulink
platform. Yearly analysis of HEN yields the total heat recovered to charge the BTES, allow-
ing for the calculation of Qa. Then, the Qevap and PLF m are set based on the corresponding
HP size and the BTES length is calculated. Note that Qevap is the averaged heat extracted
from the ground, which is calculated by deducting the contribution of the air evaporator
from the nominal evaporator capacity.


--- page 8 ---
Energies 2023, 16, 5493 8 of 22
3.4. Technoeconomic Analysis
3.4.1. Economic Model
In order to compare the feasibility and proﬁtability of the designed systems and
facilitate the selection of the best scenario, an economic analysis is conducted. Capital and
operating costs are two key factors that are considered in an economic assessment. Capital
investment is mostly associated with the purchased equipment and can be estimated by
summation of individual equipment costs. Table 2 summarizes the cost functions used to
estimate initial expenses of the system under study.
Table 2. Capital cost correlations for system components.
Equipment Component Correlation Ref
HP
PHX CPHX = 805A0.74 [23]
Compressor CComp = 71.7
.
m
0.92−ηis
PrLn (Pr) [24]
Expansion valve Cvalve = 114
.
m [24]
AHU
FTHX CFTHX = 100A0.85 [25]
Fan CFan = 1500
( .
m
10
)0.36 [26]
AHX CAHX = 231A0.639 [23]
BTES Borehole heat exchanger (drilling, installation, and pipe costs) 43 CAD/m [27]
NG boiler NG boiler CBoiler = 205 Q0.87
Boiler [28]
The operating cost is primarily composed of natural gas and electricity consumption
expenses. The required hot utility provided by the NG boiler is obtained by applying
a daily thermal balance to the buffer tank. So, the total yearly hot utility for each TD is
calculated as:
QH
Utility =
365
∑
d=1
max
(
24
∑
h=1
.
Q
Load
h − 24
.
Q
Design
Cond,TD, 0
)
(7)
Furthermore, the electric utility is related to the electricity consumption of the HP ,
AHU fans, and circulation pumps that are expressed by the following equations:
EHP
Utility ={
365
∑
d=1
(
24
∑
h=1
.
Q
Load
h )− QH
Utility} 1
COP (8)
EFan
Utility =
.
Vair·∆PAHU (9)
EPump
Utility = ∆Pre f·LBTES·
.
VBTES (10)
In the above equations, ∆PAHU denotes the total pressure drop across the AHU,
.
Vair
is the volumetric ﬂow rate of the air,
.
VBTES is the water/glycol ﬂow rate circulated in the
BTES, and ∆Pre f is the head loss per meter of the borehole heat exchangers that is assumed
to be 0.4 kPa/m based on the typical values often used in BTES design methodologies [27].
Note that the cost associated with the FCU recirculation pump is excluded from the analysis
since it is common to all scenarios. The total operating cost is calculated as follows:
COP =QH
Utility·CNG +
(
EHP
Utility + EFan
Utility + EPump
Utility
)
·Celec (11)
where CNG and Celec are the electricity and natural gas prices and are set to 0.079 ¢/kWh
and 0.028 ¢/kWh, respectively, based on averaged Canadian tariffs for businesses. In
addition, annual maintenance costs are assumed to be 2% of the total capital cost [29].


--- page 9 ---
Energies 2023, 16, 5493 9 of 22
3.4.2. Economic Performance Criteria
In order to determine the best trade-off between capital and operating costs, two
different economic criteria are evaluated, namely, total annualized cost (TAC) and payback
period (PBP). The TAC is obtained by summation of the operating costs and the annualized
capital costs. The annualized capital cost is expressed as:
Cinv
anul = CRF·Cinv (12)
TAC = Cinv
anul + Cop (13)
where, CRF is the capital recovery factor, which is a function of the interest rate and project
lifetime. In this study, the interest rate and project lifetime are assumed to be 5% and 20
years, respectively.
CRF = i(i + 1)n
(i + 1)n− 1 (14)
The payback period (PBP) is deﬁned as the required time to recover the initial invest-
ment. This index shows the ability of the system to refund the additional initial capital
investment by a reduction in operating costs. In the present study, the NG boiler-only
scenario is used as the reference heating system to calculate the PBP . So, the PBP for each
HEN is given by:
PBP =
Cinv− Cinv
re f
Cop− Cop
re f
(15)
3.4.3. Energy Saving Potential
To determine the energy efﬁciency of the suggested HEN designs, the energy savings
achieved for each system with respect to the reference case are calculated. In that regard, the
PESR (primary energy saving ratio) is used as the evaluation criterion to assess the energy
savings potential. The PESR is deﬁned as the ratio of the energy saved by introducing the
HEN to the energy consumption of the reference system and is written as:
PESR HEN = PERe f− PEHEN
PERe f (16)
where PE is the primary energy consumption (non-renewable sources) and is calculated by
the summation of electricity and natural gas consumption for all components of the system.
4. Results
4.1. Conﬁguration of HEN Design Alternatives
In this section, in order to better understand the problem of HEN design, the HEN
layouts designed based on different TDs are investigated. Figure 4 compares CCs and
grid diagrams for three different subnetworks corresponding to different times of TD5. As
shown in this ﬁgure, the grid diagram conﬁguration changes substantially depending on
the availability of streams, instantaneous CP values, and temperature ranges. The selected
times exhibit all possible HEN topologies that can occur during TD5. For the remaining
hours of the day, the HEN topology is quite similar to any of these three subnetworks
although heat exchanger duties differ.
As mentioned earlier, TD5 is a “mild-cold” typical day with a relatively moderate
ventilation rate. Figure 5 illustrates the variations of weather parameters and their impact
on the required heating and ventilation rate during TD5. At t = 0 h, the greenhouse requires
heating while the ventilation system is off. At this time the system acts exactly like a
regular geothermal HP , meaning that the BTES is the only heat source available to the
HP . However, around noon, at t = 13 h, when radiation is maximum, the accumulation of
solar energy inside the greenhouse causes a transition from heating to cooling mode and


--- page 10 ---
Energies 2023, 16, 5493 10 of 22
the HP is switched off. In addition, the excessive moisture removal requirement arising
from biological activity of the plants, intensiﬁed by high levels of radiation, forces the
ventilation system to operate at its maximum capacity during this speciﬁc period. In this
case, according to the grid diagram, two exchangers are required by which the exhaust air
heat is ﬁrst utilized to recharge the BTES (HX3) and then used to preheat outdoor frigid air
(HX4) to a level meeting the cooling load. However, since the HP is off, part of the exhaust
air energy that could have been reused by the HP is rejected to the environment and this is
shown by an imaginary cold utility applied to the exhaust air stream in the grid diagram.
Figure 4. Composite curves and corresponding grid diagrams for different subnetworks during
different times of the day (TD5); from top to bottom: t = 0 h, t = 13 h, and t = 16 h.


--- page 11 ---
Energies 2023, 16, 5493 11 of 22
Figure 5. Variations of weather parameters and the required heating and ventilation rate during TD5.
As the radiation intensity gradually decreases, the greenhouse climate control system
shifts back to heating mode and the HP switches on again (t = 14–17 h). The designed HEN
structures under this condition allow the HP to work in a hybrid mode, which means an
auxiliary evaporator (HX5) must be placed downstream of the AHX (HX4) to capture the
remaining heat from the exhaust air (see Figure 4, t = 16 h). Since the AHX heat duty is
relatively high to recover as much heat as possible from the exhaust air in heating mode,
the remaining exhaust airﬂow heat content is not sufﬁcient to fully supply the evaporation
heat and a BTES evaporator is still required.
In order to better understand the stream interconnections in the network, the schematic
conﬁguration of the overall HEN for TD5 is shown in Figure 6. Given the fact that the
sizing process was based on TD5 conditions, the composite curves show that there is no
need for any hot utility during TD5. However, it is obvious that the HEN5 designed for
a mild-cold day (i.e., TD5) requires additional hot utility when used for cold days (for
example TD1). As a result, a backup NG boiler is used to provide the required “hot utility”
to meet the heating demand for off-design operation of the system. In addition, since TD5
represents a winter day with a relatively low outdoor temperature, there is not a signiﬁcant
potential for supply airﬂow heat recovery and only one exchanger, HX4, is assigned to the
supply side. In other words, AHX (HX4) is the only mechanism for generating cooling,
resulting in an undersized system for the summer in terms of cooling capability. Thus, in
order to meet the cooling loads in summer, the supplementary “cold utility” is provided
by natural ventilation. It is worth mentioning that the ﬂow capacity of the AHU, which is
an important factor inﬂuencing the size of the AHU and its fans, is equal to the maximum
required ventilation rate of the corresponding TD. This allows the AHU size to ﬂexibly
change during the design phase according to the TD conditions, which provides valuable
design insights to determine the best balance between forced and natural ventilation.
To better analyze the structural changes of HEN architecture for different TDs, the
HEN schematics for TD6 and TD7 are demonstrated in Figures 7 and 8. Since TD5 and
TD6 are both typical mild-cold days, the overall arrangement of the system is relatively
similar to that of TD5. The only change is a bypass channel with an extra heat exchanger at
the exhaust side of the AHU. In fact, the network has been adjusted to handle a larger air
ﬂow rate with more heating capacity (i.e., CP). In this design, by changing the bypass ratio
using shutters, the heat recovery priority may be shifted from direct heat recovery (HX4) to
indirect heat recovery (HX6).


--- page 12 ---
Energies 2023, 16, 5493 12 of 22
Figure 6. Schematic of the HEN design based on heat integration for TD5 (HEN5).
Figure 7. Schematic of the HEN design based on heat integration for TD6 (HEN6).
The AHU structure for typical summer days is quite different in some respects from
those of winter days. As shown in Figure 8, for TD7, an additional heat exchanger (HX6)
is positioned before the AHX to capture the incoming air excess heat and store it in the
BTES. This can effectively improve the system capability in terms of cooling performance.
Furthermore, adding a bypass on the supply side allows better control over the HX4 heat
duty to achieve the desired outlet temperature for the air handling unit (AHU). Note that
for the rest of the HENs represented by the typical “mild-cold “and “warm” days (i.e., TD8
to TD12) the HEN topology is similar to either TD6 or TD7, while they differ in terms of
the size of both the heat exchangers and the equipment.


--- page 13 ---
Energies 2023, 16, 5493 13 of 22
Figure 8. Schematic of the HEN design based on heat integration for TD7 (HEN7).
For typical “cold” days, TD1 to TD4, since the HEN structure is conﬁgured to ac-
commodate a ventilation rate of zero, the AHU is excluded from the design, leading to
comparatively simpler conﬁgurations. Figure 9 compares HENs 1 to 4 structures against
the reference design. In the case of HEN1, the boiler is not required since the HP is sized
based on the coldest day of the year. However, HENs 1 to 3 offer three design alternatives
for combinations of a GSHP and a boiler based on the three most frequently occurring
weather patterns of winter. It is important to note that all structures initially designed
based on winter days without an AHU operate with a conventional natural ventilation
system during summer. In the following section, the sizing results of the designed HENs
will be discussed.
Figure 9. Comparison of (a) reference design with (b) HEN1 and (c) HEN2,3,4.
4.2. Speciﬁcations of the Designed HENs
A detailed description of all 12 designed HENs is presented in Table 3. As discussed
earlier, out of all design alternatives, four different scenarios (HEN1 to HEN4) are the
hybridization of an NG boiler with a geothermal heat pump for a naturally-ventilated
greenhouse. Without an air handling unit, PHXs in the HP cycle are the only heat exchang-
ers of these HENs.
On the other hand, there are eight different HENs (HEN5 to HEN12) in which the
ventilation waste heat is effectively integrated into the system using an AHU. In these cases,
the HP features an additional air-source evaporator resulting in a considerably smaller
BTES length than scenarios with regular GSHP (HEN1 to HEN4). Furthermore, for the
typical days representing “warm” days of the year (TD7, 10, 11, and 12), since the HEN is
conﬁgured to provide sufﬁcient cooling capacity, there needs to be a large FTHX to collect a


--- page 14 ---
Energies 2023, 16, 5493 14 of 22
signiﬁcant amount of heat from the air delivered to the greenhouse. This is the main reason
why the total FTHX heat transfer area is a large number for networks designed based on
warm typical days.
Table 3. Speciﬁcations of the HENs designed for different typical days (Ref denotes the reference
greenhouse).
No. of HEN Ref 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
HP heating capacity (kW) - 167.5 141.7 99.2 30.8 71.5 54 35.6 52.1 62.5 38.5 34 33.1
Boiler capacity (kW) 167.5 - 25.8 68.3 136.7 96 113.5 131.9 115.4 105 129 133.5 134.4
BTES total length (m) - 4092 3671 2879 895 806 611 309 499 634 345 283 275
PHX (m2) - 13.9 12.7 10.5 5.6 8.7 7.5 6 7.4 8.2 6.2 5.8 5.7
AHX (m2) - - - - - 37 354 247 384 264 239 153 165
FTHX (m2) - - - - - 54 110 274 107 132 410 569 588
Fans capacity (m3/s) - - - - - 3 11.4 19.6 16 12.6 42.6 43 50
4.3. Yearly Performance Analysis of the Designed HENs
Table 4 compares the performance of the design candidates calculated by dynamic
simulation of each scenario over the course of an entire year. As can be seen, integration of
ventilation airﬂows substantially decreases the ventilation losses and the HENs with higher
forced/natural ventilation ratios have lower ventilation losses. The maximum reduction of
5% in the total heating demand can be achieved by a nearly fully-integrated ventilation
system (HEN12). In addition, the results highlight that even for the smallest AHU designed
for HEN5, almost 17% ventilation can be achieved through forced ventilation. The reason
for this is that the daily ventilation peaks occur for only a few hours per day, and the
typical ventilation rate is relatively low during the day. On the contrary, the largest AHU
corresponds to HEN12 in which almost all ventilation peaks are covered by a forced
ventilation system. Furthermore, the HP heating ratio values, deﬁned as the thermal
contribution of the HP to the overall heating, are reported in this table. As expected,
the share of thermal energy provided by the HP is higher for the colder typical weather
conditions in comparison to the others. Particularly, HEN5 has the highest HP contribution
among all designs with an integrated ventilation system (i.e., TD5 to TD12).
Table 4. Yearly performance of the greenhouse (Ref denotes the reference greenhouse).
No. of HEN Ref 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Total heating (MWh) 481.4 481.4 481.4 481.4 481.4 475.9 469.6 472.4 468.6 469.1 460.8 457.7 457.6
Ventilation loss (kwh) 37,834 37,834 37,834 37,834 37,834 32,298 25,988 28,814 25,009 25,538 17,231 14,121 14,000
Forced/natural
ventilation ratio 0 0 0 0 0 0.17 0.53 0.72 0.65 0.57 0.92 0.92 0.95
HP heating ratio 0 1 0.99 0.94 0.5 0.82 0.72 0.57 0.71 0.78 0.56 0.54 0.54
4.4. Economic Analysis
In this section, the economic analysis results are presented to examine the practicality
of all designed HENs. Figure 10 shows the investment cost breakdown of the proposed
HENs. As can be seen, the BTES size is the most important factor contributing to the total
investment cost, particularly for designs without an AHU (HEN1 to HEN4). The system
has the maximum investment cost for the standalone GSHP sized according the coldest day
of the year (HEN1). In this case, the initial capital investment is about seven times more
than the reference case scenario. For all GSHP + boiler scenarios, namely, HENs 2, 3, and
4, the contribution of BTES to the total capital cost becomes relatively smaller as a larger
boiler is integrated. However, a larger boiler may incur more operating cost and reduce the
energy savings potential of the system. As shown in Figure 11, the total operating cost for
HEN4 with a 137 kW boiler is about 17% more than that of the HEN1 with no boiler.


--- page 15 ---
Energies 2023, 16, 5493 15 of 22
Figure 10. Breakdown of capital investment costs for the designed HENs.
Figure 11. Breakdown of operating costs for the designed HENs.
On the other hand, for all designed HENs having an AHU (HEN5 to HEN12), the
AHU unit cost accounts for a large proportion of the total investment cost. For HENs
designed based on the warmer typical days of the year (HEN10, 11, and 12), the HP , BTES,
and boiler are comparatively smaller, and the AHU investment cost contribution can be
as much as 52% of the total investment cost. Note that a larger AHU requires larger fans
resulting in increased operating costs. However, the contribution of fan energy cost ranges
from only 3% to 13% of the total operating cost and the utility costs are still dominated by
the energy consumption of the HP and boiler. Additionally, the operating cost related to
the circulation pumps varies based on the BTES size and causes a slight increase in the total
energy cost of the system.
The comparison of TAC and PBP values for different HENs is demonstrated in
Figure 12. The HENs with a payback period beyond the project’s lifetime (20 years) are
deemed infeasible and therefore discarded.


--- page 16 ---
Energies 2023, 16, 5493 16 of 22
Figure 12. TAC values and corresponding PBPs for the designed HENs.
The results clearly show that the conventional boiler-assisted GSHP designs (HEN1, 2,
and 3) have long PBPs and are not economically competitive unless a relatively small HP is
integrated (HEN4). This can be attributed to the signiﬁcantly high initial costs due to the
larger BTES. On the other hand, taking advantage of ventilation waste heat, HEN5–12 have
relatively lower TAC values. Nevertheless, for HEN7, 11, and 12, each with a relatively
large AHU, the AHU’s capital cost and fan energy consumption offset the cost beneﬁt from
energy savings, resulting in infeasible PBPs. HEN5 has the lowest TAC of 15,720 USD/y,
which is quite comparable to that of the reference case. In this case, effective integration
of ventilation air reduces the operating cost by a large margin and can make HEN5 a
cost-competitive design with a PBP of 9.5 years. In general, increasing the contribution of
forced ventilation adversely affects the cost-effectiveness of the HEN.
4.5. Selection of Optimal HEN Design
Table 5 presents the PESR values for all economically feasible HEN designs. According
to this table, HEN5 is the best performing structure in terms of energy efﬁciency, which
reduces the primary energy consumption by 57.3%. Having high energy efﬁciency with a
short PBP of 9.5 years and almost the same TAC value as the reference design, HEN5 is
selected as the best integrated network among all designed HENs.
Table 5. PESR values for different HENs.
No. of HEN 4 5 6 8 9 10
PESR HEN 0.326 0.573 0.48 0.466 0.509 0.41
5. Conclusions
This paper investigated the possibility of ventilation waste heat recovery in green-
houses in the context of heat integration. A systematic methodology based on dynamic
PA was developed to design an HEN with respect to economic and energy savings criteria.
The proposed methodology was demonstrated based on a greenhouse climate conditioning
system including a boiler, a heat pump, an air handling unit, and borehole heat storage.
A number of typical days were identiﬁed through a clustering approach to reduce the
integration scenarios to a manageable size, and as a result, 12 HENs were designed and


--- page 17 ---
Energies 2023, 16, 5493 17 of 22
optimal equipment sizing and heat exchanger placement were determined. Finally, the best
design was selected using a techno-economic analysis.
Thermal efﬁciency and economic performance of all design alternatives were exam-
ined using different criteria, including TAC, PBP , and PESR. The best performing design
was found to be HEN5 with a TAC of 15,720 USD/y and a PBP of 9.5. The optimal sys-
tem also demonstrated a signiﬁcant energy saving potential of 57% with respect to the
reference design.
In addition, it was shown that the BTES size is the most important factor contributing
to the total system investment cost. The integration of ventilation air as a supplementary
heat source for the HP decreases the required BTES size and thereby signiﬁcantly reduces
the investment cost. Although the reference design (NG boiler and natural ventilation)
still has a lower initial cost by a large margin, the integrated systems showed superior
performance over the reference design in terms of operating cost with the given energy
tariffs. However, the operating cost beneﬁt of a larger AHU unit, particularly for those
scenarios associated with HENs designed for typical summer days (HEN7, 10, 11, 12),
was diminished by the elevated fan energy consumption. In the case of the best design
(HEN5), the integrated forced-ventilation contribution was found to be only 17% of the
total ventilation requirement. So, it can be concluded that smaller AHUs are favored in
terms of TAC. HEN5 also has the highest thermal contribution of the HP to the total heating
requirements, being 82%.
Overall, there is a huge potential for heat recovery from ventilation air ﬂows in green-
houses. Integration of ventilation waste heat into the greenhouse HVAC system not only
allows for smaller BTES but also signiﬁcantly improves greenhouse energy efﬁciency. Fur-
thermore, dynamic PA has been proven to be a promising approach to addressing a highly
dynamic heat integration problem. However, one important limitation of this method is that
it does not provide a guarantee for achieving the optimal year-round design, as it primarily
deals with local optima derived from the most frequently occurring scenarios throughout
the year. Consequently, there is a need for further research to explore approaches that can
address this limitation and enable the identiﬁcation of global optimum solutions. One
promising solution for future investigation is the integration of superstructure-based math-
ematical heat exchange network (HEN) design with clustering techniques. This integration
could offer a more comprehensive analysis by considering a wider range of scenarios
and their associated solutions, leading to a better understanding of the optimal design
conﬁgurations for greenhouse climate-conditioning systems.
Author Contributions: M.G.: Conceptualization, methodology, investigation, validation, software,
visualization, writing—original draft, writing—review and editing; C.R.: conceptualization, review
and editing; M.S.: supervision, resources, methodology, funding acquisition, writing—review and
editing. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: The authors acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada for this project (RGPIN-2019-05826).
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
AHU air handling unit
AHX air-to-air heat exchanger
BTES borehole thermal energy storage
CAD Canadian dollar
CCs composite curves
COP coefﬁcient of performance of heat pump
EAHP exhaust air heat pump


--- page 18 ---
Energies 2023, 16, 5493 18 of 22
FCU fan coil unit
FTHX ﬁnned tube heat exchanger
GHI global horizontal irradiance (W/m 2)
GSHP ground source heat pump
HEN heat exchanger network
HP heat pump
HX heat exchanger
HVAC heating, cooling, and air conditioning
NG natural gas
PA pinch analysis
PBP payback period
PESR primary energy saving ratio
PHX plate heat exchanger
TAC total annualized cost
TD typical day
Subscripts
air airﬂow passing through AHU
annul annualized
ce cold stream outlet
ci cold stream inlet
cond condenser of heat pump
comp compressor of heat pump
eva evaporator of heat pump
g gas/or ground
he hot stream outlet
hi hot stream inlet
l liquid
R refrigerant
ref reference greenhouse
w water
Superscripts
Design designed capacity
elec electricity
inv investment
Load heating demand
H heating
OP operational
Variables
A total heat transfer area (m 2)
Amin min ﬂow area (m2)
C cost (USD)
CP heat capacity of streams (kW/K)
cp speciﬁc heat capacity (kJ/kg·K)
d tube inside diameter (m)
D tube outside diameter (m)
Dh hydraulic diameter (m)
E electricity consumption (kWh)
f friction coefﬁcient
G mass ﬂux (kg/m 2 s)
h convection heat transfer coefﬁcient (W/m 2 K)
k conduction heat transfer coefﬁcient (W/m K)
L length (m).
m mass ﬂow rate (kg/s)
Nu Nusselt number
Pr Prandtl number


--- page 19 ---
Energies 2023, 16, 5493 19 of 22
Q thermal energy (kWh).
Q thermal energy rate (kW)
Re Reynolds number
t plate thickness (m)
T temperature ( ◦C)
U overall heat transfer coefﬁcient (W/m 2 K).
V volumetric ﬂow rate (m 3/s).
W power consumption (kW)
x saturated vapor quality
Greek letters
β chevron angle, degrees
ρ density (kg/m3)
ηis isentropic efﬁciency
Appendix A. Heat Exchanger Models
Various types of heat exchanger are involved in the present study. In this paper, the
thermal design and sizing of heat exchangers is accomplished using the LMTD (logarithmic
mean temperature difference) method. Figure A1 shows the ﬂowchart describing the
process of sizing the heat exchangers. In this method, different thermodynamic models
have been developed enabling appropriate sizing of the heat exchanger network. It should
be mentioned that a limit of 500 Pa is set on the maximum allowable pressure drop within
the AHU and 0.5 bar for the HP cycle. The correlations used to calculate the pressure drop
are summarize in Table A1.
Figure A1. Heat exchangers sizing ﬂowchart.
Appendix A.1. Plate Heat Exchangers (PHXs)
In the proposed system, PHXs are used as evaporator and condenser in the HP cycle.
The thermodynamic modeling of PHXs experiencing phase change is usually conducted by


--- page 20 ---
Energies 2023, 16, 5493 20 of 22
dividing the exchanger into single phase and two-phase zones. Each section is designed
separately under speciﬁed operating conditions according to the log mean temperature
difference approach, and the total heat transfer area is calculated accordingly.
Appendix A.1.1. Single Phase
For the single-phase ﬂows in PHXs, the U value can be expressed as:
1
U = 1
hw
+ t
k + 1
hR
(A1)
where the heat transfer coefﬁcients,h, are calculated using the Chisholm and Waniarchi [30]
correlation:
Nu = 0.724( 6β
π )0.646Re0.583Pr0.33 (A2)
h = k
Nu·Dh
(A3)
where Dh is the hydraulic diameter and k is the thermal conductivity.
Appendix A.1.2. Two-Phase Region
A well-accepted approach for two-phase region modeling is to divide the heat ex-
changer into a number of smaller regions, in which the ﬂuid properties can be assumed
constant. Then, for each region, the overall heat transfer coefﬁcient can be obtained by
using Equation (A1). The heat transfer coefﬁcients on the refrigerant side for the evaporator
and condenser under two-phase conditions are calculated by the following equations [31]:
NuEva,i = 1.926Boi
0.3Rei
0.5Pri
0.33(1− xi + xi( ρl
ρv
)0.5) (A4)
NuCond,i = 4.118Rei
0.4Pri
0.33 (A5)
where Bo is the boiling number and xi is the quality of refrigerant for the ith region [32].
Appendix A.2. Air-to-Air Heat Exchangers (AHXs)
Cross-corrugated air-to-air heat exchangers are used as the typical AHX in the present
study. For this type of heat exchanger, the heat transfer coefﬁcients are calculated based on
the Zhang [33] correlation as follows
Nu = 0.274Re0.569Pr0.33 (A6)
Appendix A.3. Finned-Tube Heat Exchanger (FTHXs)
For ﬁnned tube heat exchangers, different correlations are used for the air side and
liquid side. The convective heat transfer inside the tubes is estimated by the Gnielinski
equation [34]:
Nu =
(f
8
)
(Re− 1000)Pr
1 + 12.7
√
f
8
(
Pr
2
3− 1
) (A7)
f =
(
1.82log 10Re− 1.64)−2 (A8)
The heat transfer coefﬁcient of the airﬂow side of the exchanger can be expressed by
the Dias and Young correlation [35].
Nu = 0.1378Re0.718Pr0.33
( Y
H )0.296 (A9)


--- page 21 ---
Energies 2023, 16, 5493 21 of 22
The overall heat transfer coefﬁcient is formulated based on the tube outside diameter
as follows:
U = 1
D/d
hin
+
(
Dln( D
d )
2k
)
+ 1
hout η f in
(A10)
Table A1. The correlations used to calculate pressure drop.
HX Type Correlation Ref.
PHX
∆P = f l
D
ρV2
m
2
f =
[
0.5cos(β)
(0.18tan(β)+0.36sin(β)+ f0/cos(β))0.5 + 1−cos(β)√
15.2 f1
]−2
f0 = 64/Re
f1 = 597/Re
[36]
AHX
∆P = f l
D
ρV2
m
2
f = 6.536Re−0.421 [37]
FTHX (over the tube bank)
∆P = G2
2ρg
[
f A
Amin
ρg
ρl
+
(
1 + σ2)(ρg
ρl
− 1
)]
σ = minimum f ree f low
f rontal area
[38]
FTHX (inside the tubes)
∆P = f l
D
ρV2
m
2
f = 0.064
Re0.2
References
1. Anifantis, A.S.; Colantoni, A.; Pascuzzi, S. Thermal energy assessment of a small scale photovoltaic, hydrogen and geothermal
stand-alone system for greenhouse heating. Renew. Energy 2017, 103, 115–127. [CrossRef]
2. Kristinsson, J. The energy-producing greenhouse. In Proceedings of the PLEA2006—The 23rd Conference on Passive and Low
Energy Architecture, Geneva, Switzerland, 6–8 September 2006.
3. Rousse, D.R.; Martin, D.; Thériault, R.; Léveillée, F.; Boily, R. Heat recovery in greenhouses: A practical solution.Appl. Therm.
Eng. 2000, 20, 687–706. [CrossRef]
4. Gieling, T.H.; Bruins, M.; Campen, J.; Janssen, H.; Kempkes, F.; Raaphorst, M.; Sapounas, A.Monitoring Technische Systemen in
Semi-Gesloten Kassen; Wageningen UR Greenhouse Horticulture: Wageningen, The Netherlands, 2010.
5. Van den Bulck, N.; Coomans, M.; Wittemans, L.; Hanssens, J.; Steppe, K. Monitoring and energetic performance analysis of an
innovative ventilation concept in a Belgian greenhouse. Energy Build. 2013, 57, 51–57. [CrossRef]
6. Coomans, M.; Allaerts, K.; Wittemans, L.; Pinxteren, D. Monitoring and energetic performance of two similar semi-closed
greenhouse ventilation systems. Energy Convers. Manag. 2013, 76, 128–136. [CrossRef]
7. Maslak, K.; Nimmermark, S. Thermal energy use for dehumidiﬁcation of a tomato greenhouse by natural ventilation and a
system with an air-to-air heat exchanger. Agric. Food Sci. 2017, 26, 56–66. [CrossRef]
8. Fehrm, M.; Reiners, W.; Ungemach, M. Exhaust air heat recovery in buildings. Int. J. Refrig. 2002, 25, 439–449. [CrossRef]
9. Fracastoro, G.V .; Serraino, M. Energy analyses of buildings equipped with exhaust air heat pumps (EAHP).Energy Build. 2010, 42,
1283–1289. [CrossRef]
10. Li, B.; Wild, P .; Rowe, A. Performance of a heat recovery ventilator coupled with an air-to-air heat pump for residential suites in
Canadian cities. J. Build. Eng. 2019, 21, 343–354. [CrossRef]
11. Perone, C.; Orsino, M.; La Fianza, G.; Giametta, F.; Catalano, P . Study of a mechanical ventilation system with heat recovery to
control temperature in a monitored agricultural environment under Summer conditions.J. Build. Eng. 2021, 43, 102745. [CrossRef]
12. Liu, S.; Ma, G.; Xu, S.; Jia, X.; Wu, G. Experimental study of ventilation system with heat recovery integrated by pump-driven
loop heat pipe and heat pump. J. Build. Eng. 2022, 52, 104404. [CrossRef]
13. Smith, R. Chemical Process: Design and Integration; John Wiley & Sons: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2005.
14. Miseviˇ ci¯ut˙e, V .; Motuzien˙e, V .; Valanˇ cius, K. The application of the Pinch method for the analysis of the heat exchangers network
in a ventilation system of a building. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2018, 129, 772–781. [CrossRef]
15. Reddick, C.; Sorin, M.; Bonhivers, J.-C.; Laperle, D. Waste heat and renewable energy integration in buildings. Energy Build. 2020,
211, 109803. [CrossRef]


--- page 22 ---
Energies 2023, 16, 5493 22 of 22
16. Hosseinnia, S.M.; Sorin, M. A systematic pinch approach to integrate stratiﬁed thermal energy storage in buildings. Energy Build.
2021, 232, 110663. [CrossRef]
17. Hosseinnia, S.M.; Sorin, M. Energy targeting approach for optimum solar assisted ground source heat pump integration in
buildings. Energy 2022, 248, 123528. [CrossRef]
18. Ghaderi, M.; Hosseinnia, S.M.; Sorin, M. Assessment of waste heat recovery potential in greenhouse ventilation systems using
dynamic pinch analysis. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2023, 227, 120363. [CrossRef]
19. Ahamed, M.S.; Guo, H.; Tanino, K. A quasi-steady state model for predicting the heating requirements of conventional green-
houses in cold regions. Inf. Process. Agric. 2018, 5, 33–46. [CrossRef]
20. Yang, P .; Liu, L.-l.; Du, J.; Li, J.-l.; Meng, Q.-w. Heat exchanger network synthesis for batch processes by involving heat storages
with cost targets. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2014, 70, 1276–1282. [CrossRef]
21. Kemp, I.C. Pinch Analysis and Process Integration: A User Guide on Process Integration for the Efﬁcient Use of Energy ; Elsevier:
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2011.
22. Kavanaugh, S.P . Design of geothermal systems for commercial and institutional buildings. InGround-Source Heat Pumps; ASHRE:
New York, NY, USA, 1997.
23. Wang, B.; Arsenyeva, O.; Zeng, M.; Klemeš, J.J.; Varbanov, P .S. An advanced Grid Diagram for heat exchanger network retroﬁt
with detailed plate heat exchanger design. Energy 2022, 248, 123485. [CrossRef]
24. Xu, Y.; Mao, C.; Huang, Y.; Shen, X.; Xu, X.; Chen, G. Performance evaluation and multi-objective optimization of a low-
temperature CO2 heat pump water heater based on artiﬁcial neural network and new economic analysis.Energy 2021, 216, 119232.
[CrossRef]
25. Hsieh, J.-C.; Lai, C.-C.; Chen, Y.-H. Thermoeconomic analysis of a waste heat recovery system with ﬂuctuating ﬂue gas scenario.
Energy 2022, 258, 124866. [CrossRef]
26. Le Roux, D.; Olivès, R.; Neveu, P . Geometry optimisation of an industrial thermocline Thermal Energy Storage combining exergy,
Life Cycle Assessment and Life Cycle Cost Analysis. J. Energy Storage 2022, 55, 105776. [CrossRef]
27. Robert, F.; Gosselin, L. New methodology to design ground coupled heat pump systems based on total cost minimization. Appl.
Therm. Eng. 2014, 62, 481–491. [CrossRef]
28. Ghamari, V .; Hajabdollahi, H.; Dehaj, M.S.; Saleh, A. Investigating the effect of energy storage tanks on thermoeconomic
optimization of integrated combined cooling, heating and power generation with desalination plant. J. Energy Storage 2022, 56,
106120. [CrossRef]
29. Sagani, A.; Vrettakos, G.; Dedoussis, V . Viability assessment of a combined hybrid electricity and heat system for remote
household applications. Sol. Energy 2017, 151, 33–47. [CrossRef]
30. Chisholm, D.; Wanniarachchi, A. Plate heat exchangers: Plate selection and arrangement. In Proceedings of the AIChE Meeting,
Orlando, FL, USA, 18–22 March 1990.
31. Li, R.; Wang, H.; Yao, E.; Zhang, S. Thermo-economic comparison and parametric optimizations among two compressed air
energy storage system based on Kalina cycle and ORC. Energies 2016, 10, 15. [CrossRef]
32. Imran, M.; Usman, M.; Park, B.-S.; Kim, H.-J.; Lee, D.-H. Multi-objective optimization of evaporator of organic Rankine cycle
(ORC) for low temperature geothermal heat source. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2015, 80, 1–9. [CrossRef]
33. Zhang, L.-Z. Numerical study of periodically fully developed ﬂow and heat transfer in cross-corrugated triangular channels in
transitional ﬂow regime. Numer. Heat Transf. Part A Appl. 2005, 48, 387–405. [CrossRef]
34. Gnielinski, V . New equations for heat and mass transfer in turbulent pipe and channel ﬂow. Int. Chem. Eng. 1976, 16, 359–368.
35. Wang, Z.; Hu, Y.; Xia, X.; Zuo, Q.; Zhao, B.; Li, Z. Thermo-economic selection criteria of working ﬂuid used in dual-loop ORC for
engine waste heat recovery by multi-objective optimization. Energy 2020, 197, 117053. [CrossRef]
36. Chatzopoulou, M.A.; Lecompte, S.; De Paepe, M.; Markides, C.N. Off-design optimisation of organic Rankine cycle (ORC) engines
with different heat exchangers and volumetric expanders in waste heat recovery applications. Appl. Energy 2019, 253, 113442.
[CrossRef]
37. Liang, C.; Tong, X.; Lei, T.; Li, Z.; Wu, G. Optimal design of an air-to-air heat exchanger with cross-corrugated triangular ducts by
using a particle swarm optimization algorithm. Appl. Sci. 2017, 7, 554. [CrossRef]
38. Wang, C.-C. Recent progress on the air-side performance of ﬁn-and-tube heat exchangers. Int. J. Heat Exch. 2000, 1, 49–76.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.