

--- page 1 ---
International Journal of Innovative Technology and Exploring Engineering (IJITEE) 
ISSN: 2278-3075 (Online), Volume-9 Issue-9, July 2020 
278 
Published By: 
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering 
and Sciences Publication  
Retrieval Number: I7149079920/2020©BEIESP 
DOI: 10.35940/ijitee.I7149.079920 
Journal Website: www.ijitee.org 
 
Abstract: Internet of Things (IoT ) allows connections among 
various devices using the internet with the ability to gather and 
exchange data. IoT has various connecting protocols like HTTPS, 
MQTT, CoAP, SMCP, etc. A lightweight protocol of all these 
protocols is the Message Queuing Telemet ry Transport (MQTT) 
protocol. Agriculture is the backbone of India it plays a significant 
role in the growth of the economics of the country. The majority of 
the population in India focused on developing a good yield of the 
crop at their available space wh ich is leading to the development 
of various greenhouse and smart farming methods. The 
technology developments will be enabling to design and develop a 
simple intelligent system for smart farming and maintaining the 
greenhouse environment. The proposed system is designed using 
an ARM Cortex processor with the other supporting peripherals 
for monitoring  and constantly updating and controlling 
environmental parameter values to achieve optimal growth and 
yield of plants. In this paper, the proposed system cons ists of 
several sensors for measuring different parameters including 
temperature, humidity, soil moisture, air pressure, and fertilizer 
content. Further, the obtained data is sent to the cloud by using 
IoT based ThingSpeak with the secured MQTT protocol to  
monitor the parameters. An efficient Machine Learning algorithm 
is developed to predict the parameters like soil moisture, fertilizer 
content sprayed and weather data i.e., humidity, and temperature. 
The accuracy obtained using Machine Learning algorithm i.e. 
Decision Tree method is 97%. 
Index Terms: Machine Learning, MQTT, IoT, ARM, 
ThingSpeak. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Among all the sectors, there is rapid growth in the 
agriculture sector. The increase in the farming sector is due to 
the introduction of a smart agri culture concept using IoT 
devices, digitalization, and greenhouse. The term 
greenhouses mean a controlled environment space or area to 
grow plants [1]. To increase the yield production of the crops 
different environmental parameters including temperature, 
air pressure, humidity, soil moisture, fertilizer content in the 
farm, etc. needs continuous surveillance and control are 
necessary for a greenhouse system.  
 
 
Revised Manuscript Received on July 30, 2020. 
* Correspondence Author 
G. Sai Teja *, Department of Electronics and Communication, CBIT, 
Hyderabad, INDIA. (e-mail: gandlasaitej@gmail.com).  
P. Sathish  Department of Electronics and Communication, CBIT, 
Hyderabad, INDIA. (e-mail: psathish_ece@cbit.ac.in). 
 
© The Authors. Published by Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering and 
Sciences Publication (BEIESP). This is an open access article under the CC 
BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) 
 
 
Even the population in the world is growing day by day so the 
need of food and limitation of space or land as an  
agro-economic activity make smart farming and greenhouses 
are becoming popular and has become one of promising 
solution for securing the food supply. Apart from that, 
extreme weather changes and climates affect the production 
of the crop, thu s increasing their prices and lowering the 
quality of the crops produced [9].      The Internet of Things 
allows for clear linkages between various computers, apps, 
and internet infrastructure, and this system often enables 
people to operate easily. As clai med by the government of 
INDIA the IoT policy, the government plans to invest 15 
billion in the IoT domain by the year 2020. Besides, in the 
Indian Government's policy, IoT helps automate solutions to 
the problems facing different industries, such as shopp ing, 
disaster management, farming, vehicles, mining, banking, 
and so on. There is a huge and wide range of IoT equipment 
designed by various organizations are market available for 
services such as quality of water monitoring, crop growth 
patterns tracking, smart routes for field sprinkling pesticides 
and fertilizers, high -tech laser -assisted precision land 
leveling, plants, and human health monitoring, and various 
other applications. But most sections available in the market 
are inexpensive and the procurem ent of this commodity is 
economically unnecessary in a nation such as India still has 
low and marginal 80% of farmers [7]. 
II. LITERATURE SURVEY 
Hamza, Mounir, Khaoula, designed a smart irrigation 
system based on Arduino and ThingSpeak for Algeria. The 
system is based on the IoT platform ThingSpeak cloud and 
Arduino to control the irrigation by using smartphones. The 
authors used the ESP8266 Wi -Fi module to communicate 
with the cloud and the sensors networks. Few gaps observed 
in the like in this system there i s no SMS alert related to the 
farmer. They did not measure the air temperature and air 
pressure of the farm. Any prediction methods are used by the 
authors in their design [1].  The authors developed an IoT 
based greenhouse model for traceability and monito ring of 
seedlings and other agricultural products in the germination 
and growth stages of a crop. The crop they used for the 
greenhouse system is the cherry tomato. The proposed 
method helps to monitor variables include luminosity, 
humidity, temperature, a nd use of water, showing the 
cumulative utilization of water by field, field trends, and time 
for production.  
 
 
 
MQTT Protocol based Smart Greenhouse 
Environment Monitoring System using Machine 
Learning 
G. Sai Teja, P. Sathish.  



--- page 2 ---
MQTT Protocol based Smart Greenhouse Environment Monitoring System using Machine Learning 
 
279 
Published By: 
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering 
and Sciences Publication  
Retrieval Number: I7149079920/2020©BEIESP 
DOI: 10.35940/ijitee.I7149.079920 
Journal Website: www.ijitee.org 
The system also enables automated control of the 
greenhouse using a temperature control or irrigation system 
and discusses the important profile o f the in-home terrace of 
agricultural products ranging from seed to crop final produce.  
They have done a novel behavioral study of many species 
comprising local agriculture. The data collected is uploaded 
to the web service platform and then shared wit h consumers 
and supply-chain actors. They used the Raspberry Pi 3 as the 
main microcontroller unit to communicate via Wi-Fi. Analog 
proportional-integral (PID) control techniques are being 
developed in conjunction with the multi -input Multi -output 
(MIMO) system. So, based on this assumption, a fuzzy PID 
control was constructed from a state -space in which all 
variables that make up the device have an inﬂuence. One of 
the gaps observed is that PID control is designed only for the 
temperature and humidity parameters [2]. 
Ravi Kishore Kodali et.al made an MQTT based smart 
irrigation system. The microcontroller unit used is 
NodeMCU and a soil moisture sensor, and with a water pump 
to pump the water. In this device Message Queue, Telemetry 
Transport Protocol (MQTT ) is used for moving the records 
among NodeMCU12E and the sensor. Soil moisture sends 
data to NodeMCU-12E, if the soil is dry then NodeMCU-12E 
send instruction to the water pump and water pump will start 
and after moisture goes up by some value it will off the water 
pump. They are even using LCD to display the current state 
of soil and water pump. Depending on the reputation of soil 
moisture content material the control unit will power the 
pump-action of water and the same values are displayed on a 
web page  of a browser or cell application. They used a 
thinger.io platform to display the value of soil moisture and 
relay position on a mobile app and web page. The security of 
the system is provided through cryptographic protocols 
Transport Layer Security (TLS) and Secure Socket Layer 
(SSL). The major gap of the system is the authors used 
NodeMCU microcontroller for the system development 
which can’t be manufactured at the industrial level because it 
is too sensitive MCU. The proposed system is not using an 
algorithm to decide the status factors of the parameters [3].  
The authors compared CoAP with MQTT in the smart 
health care system. They explained the importance of IoT in 
health and provided a summary of some clever health 
systems in addition to a summary of m ost of the application 
protocols used by listing their strengths and weaknesses [6]. 
III. MEASUREMENT PARAMETERS OF SMART 
FARM SYSTEM 
Basically, many parameters are needed to be measured for 
the farm. However, the Smart Farm system proposed 
measures the key agriculture parameters: 
 The temperature of the field atmosphere. 
 Soil Moisture Level of the field. 
 Fertilizer content sprayed on the farm. 
 The humidity of the farm atmosphere.  
 Air Pressure of the farm. 
IV. METHODOLOGY OF THE PROPOSED SYSTEM 
The Smart Farm/Greenhouse system makes use of four 
sensors (soil moisture, gas, pressure, and DHT -11), with a 
processing module Raspberry Pi with ARM microcontroller 
unit and one data transmission which is built in it. The main 
purpose of the proposed syst em is to gather sensor data and 
submitting it to the user every time a smart farm/greenhouse 
user wishes to verify soil moisture, fertilizer content, and 
temperature, humidity, and pressure. The Raspberry Pi acts 
as an Internet access portal server. It fun ctions as a 
mini-network with sensor control. The data is protected by 
security (secure socket layer) protocol. Also, the MQTT 
Server stores data on an ongoing basis. The benefit of using 
the cryptographic MQTT protocol and Transport Layer 
Security (TLS) i s that no uncertain data is saved along with 
the correct data. All the data of sensors processed by the 
MCU and updated into the ThingSpeak server. The entire 
block diagram of the designed system is shown in figure 1. 
 
 
Fig. 1. Block Diagram of the System 
The authorized users can access this data using a User ID 
and password to log into their accounts to view data on the 
ThingSpeak server. The parameters are also displayed on the 
customized website for the farmers. Form that websit e not 
only the farmer can see the parameters of the farm but also 
control the farm by ON/OFF of the eater motor or ON/OFF 
the fan if needed even when it is automated. The information 
all will be stored, distributed, interpreted, evaluated, and 
displayed in  real-time. The monitored data is stored in the 
database for further data processing. Here the user will also 
get an SMS alert if there is any change in the parameters of 
the farm. The collected data is verified, processed, and sent 
for machine learning algorithm for prediction purposes. Here 
the farmer is provided with an algorithm outputs so that the 
accuracy of the parameters is improved. A decision tree 
algorithm is used. The parameters like the temperature, 
humidity, air pressure, soil moisture, and th e fertilizers 
sprayed will be predicted by the algorithm. 
A. Raspberry Pi 4  
The Raspberry Pi is a microcomputer with debit card 
thickness. This has the power to process code for 
programming and to monitor a large range of components 
using its GPIO pins, the complete smart farm monitor 
network.  
 
 
 
 



--- page 3 ---
International Journal of Innovative Technology and Exploring Engineering (IJITEE) 
ISSN: 2278-3075 (Online), Volume-9 Issue-9, July 2020 
280 
Published By: 
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering 
and Sciences Publication  
Retrieval Number: I7149079920/2020©BEIESP 
DOI: 10.35940/ijitee.I7149.079920 
Journal Website: www.ijitee.org 
With a 64-bit ARMv8 Quad-Core processor with a 1.5 GHz 
minimum, the Raspberry Pi is equipped with BCM2711. This 
features 40 GPIO connectors, 4 USB ports, two micro HDMI 
sockets, and the micro -SD slot. [12]. The Raspberr y Pi 
provides wireless networking through Wi -Fi and Bluetooth 
devices.  
The Raspberry Pi can be configured until the computer is 
attached to a display, mouse, and keyboard. Raspberry Pi can 
be linked and managed via Secure Shell (SSH) from a 
smartphone or device. Putty is a Windows SSH free client 
[13] which is used in this system, developed by Simon 
Tatham. In short, the Raspberry Pi connected to various 
sensors, using Python codes and performing properly 
specified codes with the correct commands. Raspb erry Pi 4's 
front plot is seen in figure 2. 
 
Fig. 2. Raspberry Pi 4. 
B. Sensors 
The various sensors used in this work are explained in the 
following section. 
1) Soil Moisture Sensor (FC-28) 
    The sensor of ground moisture uses the soil determining 
the volumetric water content. The relationship between the 
property measured and the ground moisture must be 
modified, depending on environmental conditions such as 
temperature, soil content, and other electrical conductivity 
[1]. The microwave emissions reflected can be affected by 
soil moisture and are primarily used for agriculture and 
remote hydrological sensing. Such detectors are generally 
called gypsum blocks as soil water -potential detector . Its 
device can be worked by placing it in the earth and recording 
the status of the amount of water in the soil as shown in figure 
3. 
 
Fig. 3. Soil Moisture Sensor 
2) Gas Sensor (MQ-2) 
    It is a metal oxide semiconductor (MOS)-style Gas Sensor 
as shown in figure 4, which is often referred to as chemical 
resistors since the sensing device is based on resistance 
changes as the gas interacts in the device. Gas concentrations 
can be measured using a simple voltage splitter network.  It 
detects gasses such as LPG, alcohol, propane, carbon, CO, 
and even methane and can be measured [14]. The sensor's 
module version is supplied with a wireless pin to work 
without a microcontroller. The analog pin must also use the 
analog pin in ppm when measuring the gas. 
 
 
Fig. 4. Gas Sensor (MQ-2). 
3) Temperature and Humidity Sensor (DHT-11) 
     The DHT11 commonly used for the measurement of 
surrounding atmosphere temperature and humidity values as 
shown in figure 5. The sensor comes with a Negative 
coefficient of temperature to calculate the temperature and 
has an 8-bit microcontroller to output, so that the temperature 
and moisture values are transmitted as serial data. to the 
microcontroller. The sensor is also factory calibrated so we 
need not calibrate it again and hence easy to interface with 
other microcontrollers [7]. This sensor is us ed to find the 
surrounding atmosphere temperature so that the pH sensor 
and turbidity sensors work correctly for a long duration of 
time. The type of marine species that can live in the water can 
also be determined by temperature calculation. 
 
Fig. 5. DHT 11 Sensor 
4) Piezoelectric Transducer 
 
     A piezoelectric transducer as shown in figure 6 is a 
measuring instrument that translates energy into electrical 
charge for measuring the speed, strain, stress, and energy 
[16]. Its principle is that the power produces electric charges 
on the crystal surface when applied to the quartz crystal. In 
the same way, a force or acceleration can be measured, the 
Piezoelectric Transducer can calculate pressure [15]. 
Possible volume vibration should be accounted for 
low-pressure calculation. 
 



--- page 4 ---
MQTT Protocol based Smart Greenhouse Environment Monitoring System using Machine Learning 
 
281 
Published By: 
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering 
and Sciences Publication  
Retrieval Number: I7149079920/2020©BEIESP 
DOI: 10.35940/ijitee.I7149.079920 
Journal Website: www.ijitee.org 
 
Fig. 6. Piezoelectric Transducer 
5) Relay 
        Relays are the most commonly used switching device in 
electronics [16]. It is a device that is operated electrically. It 
detects the undesirable condition in a given region and 
controls the breaker circuit for the field being disconnected 
by ON or OFF. Relay has 3 main pins they are Common pin 
(COM), Normally Open (NO), Normally close(NC). If the 
circuit of relay senses the current fault, the electromagnetic 
area that creates the tempo rary magnetic field is energized. 
The magnet effect drives the armature of the relay for the 
connections opening or closing up.  
6) Water Pump 
     Micro water pump 3 -6V Mini submersible pump is used 
in this system design. It is a low -cost, lightweight 
Submersible pumping motor that can be operated from 3 ~ 
6V. With a low current consumption of 220 mA, it takes up to 
120 liters an hour. The pipe of tube is simply attached to the 
motor outlet, submerged, and operated in water [1]. The dry 
run may cause heati ng damage to the motor, and it will also 
cause noise. 
7) DC Fan 
     With a scale of 40x40 mm, the Brushless DC Cooling Fan 
works at 12V.The fan is extremely quiet and pushes around 
20CFM [7]. It is used in the system to cool the farm when it is 
used as a  greenhouse product to control the humidity and 
temperature of the house for the farmer. 
C.  Python 
   Python is an immensely common scripting language [17] 
because of its flexibility to code the large array of functions 
customized to all the user's needs. Py thon is used for the 
creation of a program that integrates the sensors and target 
board.  
D. ThingSpeak Server 
ThingSpeak is an IoT  data collection application for the 
analysis of various sensors, e.g. temperature, soil moisture, 
humidity, pressure, fertilizer content sprayed etc. The data 
collector collects data from edge node devices (this happens 
with the Raspberry Pi) and also all ows the data to be 
modified for historical data analysis in a software 
environment using secured MQTT protocol. First, the user 
must log in with details on his / her server. The key 
component of ThingSpeak operations is the channel 
containing data fields and a status screen. After a ThingSpeak 
channel has been developed, data is modified, processed, and 
interpreted with MATLAB code, and the data is reacted by 
tweets and other alerts [18]. 
E. MQTT Protocol  
    MQTT is an application layer interface that utiliz es the 
network TCP / IP type of communication. It is a protocol 
suited for devices with minimal resource requirements and 
was invented in 1999, Arlen Nipper and Dr. Andy 
Stanford-Clarke. The protocol is lightweight, transparent, 
simple to use, and suitable  for connectivity in environments 
such as IoT of resource management [4]. MQTT is designed 
to ensure reliable message delivery for resource -rest rusted 
devices in restricted environments such as low network 
bandwidth and unsatisfactory networks. The messag e is 
transmitted using the publish -subscribe message protocol 
client-server. This protocol has Clients subscribe to topics 
called SUBSCRIBE. Messages shall be published in a 
PUBLISH subject name. The message routing is handled by a 
broker server. An addres s known as a topic is published in 
each message. Multiple topics can be subscribed to by clients. 
Each customer subscribed to a subject receives each message 
on the subject. 
F. Machine Learning 
Machine learning (ML) is about extracting knowledge 
from data. It  is a tool for transforming information into 
knowledge.  Machine Learning is simply defined as an 
automating and improving the learning process of their 
experiences are focused on computers without really being 
programmed, that means without any human assistance [19].  
In this smart farming system mainly used supervised 
machine learning algorithm to predict the parameters and 
accuracy of the prediction. The algorithm in supervised 
learning is decision tree algorithm. 
V. ALGORITHM OF THE SYSTEM 
The proposed system's entire algorithm is shown in Figure 
7. Initially, the installation of operating system and the 
required packages in Raspberry Pi are installed. Next for the 
python algorithm for the hardware configuration, the 
required libraries such as paho-mqtt, twilio, DHT-11 libraries 
and etc. are imported. As Raspberry Pi works in both BCM 
and board modes, in the hardware connection side the 
required mode need to be selected in the python code. Now 
the hardware pins of sensors which are connected with 
Raspberry Pi needs to be configured and declared. When the 
user initiates the code the sensors will be supplied with 
sufficient voltage and the data collection will be initiated by 
the target board. The collected data is transmitted via MQTT 
protocol to ThingSpeak server for data display for the farmer 
and analysis of the data. Even the same data is posted on the 
web site designed for farmers using PHP.  
The hardware part of the system contains automatic motor 
ON/OFF and Fan ON/OFF for greenhouse to regulate 
greenhouse temperature and humidity. If the soil moisture is 
less than 40% automatically the water pump will be activated 
and about the same information of the motor status is sent to 
farmer as an offline SMS to his/her personal mobile. Even in 
case of temperature say for a particular crop if the green 
house temperature should not be more than 30 0C the 
automatically the exhaust fan will be activated to reduce the 
greenhouse atmosphere temperature. Even here the farmer 
will be getting an offline SMS to his/her personal mobile. The 
collected data is also further processed and given as the 
dataset for decision tree algorithm. The algorithm is trained 
with the real time data set and the parameters are predicted.  
 
 
 
