

--- page 1 ---
Received: 18 October 2024
Revised: 15 December 2024
Accepted: 3 January 2025
Published: 25 February 2025
Citation: Chen, S.; Liu, A.; Tang, F.;
Hou, P .; Lu, Y.; Yuan, P . A Review of
Environmental Control Strategies and
Models for Modern Agricultural
Greenhouses. Sensors 2025, 25, 1388.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s25051388
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Review
A Review of Environmental Control Strategies and Models for
Modern Agricultural Greenhouses
Shuailiang Chen, Aolong Liu, Fei Tang, Pei Hou, Yanli Lu and Pei Yuan *
College New Energy, Zhengzhou University of Light Industry, Zhengzhou 450002, China
* Correspondence: yuantung@zzuli.edu.cn
Abstract: As crucial sites for optimizing crop growth conditions, greenhouses have gained
increasing favor among scholars due to their potential to significantly enhance food pro-
duction. Greenhouse control involves regulating environmental parameters such as tem-
perature, humidity, light, and CO2 concentration to ensure an optimal growth environment
for crops while conserving energy. This paper provides an overview of various strategies
for controlling greenhouse environments, encompassing structural control, environmental
parameter management, and control algorithms, and points out that the integration of arti-
ficial neural networks with various optimization algorithms is a future trend. Additionally,
it delves into the exploration of greenhouse microclimate models and crop growth models,
noting that current models focus on some of the internal environmental parameters and
that the models rely on empirical parameters. Therefore, multi-scale coupling of green-
house models is the way forward. Furthermore, it provides insights into how to achieve
sustainable energy use in greenhouses, and the application of digital twin technology in
greenhouses is promising.
Keywords: control strategies; greenhouse models; modern agricultural greenhouse
1. Introduction
Food is fundamental to human existence, and improving crop yield plays a role in
human support. Greenhouses, as novel cultivation spaces, provide favorable conditions
for plant growth and contribute to food production. According to statistics, there are
approximately 3.64 million hectares of greenhouses globally [1]. As the area of greenhouses
increases, the problem of high energy consumption of greenhouses is becoming increasingly
serious. Greenhouse energy consumption includes heating, cooling, ventilation, and related
aspects. Research has shown that controlling these factors and developing control strategies
can improve greenhouse energy efficiency and reduce greenhouse energy consumption [2].
Therefore, research on greenhouse control strategies is essential for greenhouse agriculture.
The greenhouse system is a complex system with multi-input, multi-output, and
mutual coupling. Environmental factors that affect crop growth and development in a
greenhouse environment include temperature, humidity, light intensity, and carbon dioxide
concentration. The purpose of greenhouse control is to enhance crop growth, improve
yields, and maximize energy efficiency by regulating environmental parameters. Devel-
oping an efficient greenhouse control system requires starting with a greenhouse control
strategy and synthesizing multiple factors. Strategies for controlling greenhouse conditions
include structural control, environmental parameter control, control algorithm exploration,
and greenhouse model research. Greenhouse structural control includes shading sys-
tems [3], ventilation systems [4,5], and refrigeration/heating systems [6]. Environmental
Sensors 2025, 25, 1388 https://doi.org/10.3390/s25051388


--- page 2 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 1388 2 of 23
parameter control in greenhouses mainly involves temperature control [ 7,8], humidity
control [9,10], light modulation [11], CO2 concentration adjustment [12,13], airflow man-
agement [14,15], etc. Due to their significant and manageable impact on crop growth, most
emphasis in environmental parameter control lies in regulating temperature and humidity
within the greenhouse [16].
The developmental progression of control algorithms encompasses the following:
early Proportional–Integral–Derivative (PID) control [17], regulating single factors only;
fuzzy control [18] algorithms, enabling the control of multiple factors and variables within
greenhouse environments; and feedback control [19], which achieves effective control per-
formance through modeling. Adaptive control [20] shows outstanding control performance
in the face of variations within greenhouse environments. Model predictive control [21]
accurately predicts system behavior by setting precise mathematical models, enabling
refined control. Neural network control [22,23], when applied to greenhouse regulation,
reduces the need for making mathematical models, learning, predicting future behaviors
from data, and achieving the best control effects. Hybrid control [ 24] combines diverse
advantages to meet varied control requisites.
With the increasing concerns surrounding food security [25], greenhouse modeling
has increasingly become a focal point. Greenhouse models mainly comprise the greenhouse
microclimate model and crop growth model. The greenhouse microclimate models are
mainly categorized as mechanical models and black-box models [26]. Based on the diverse
methods of model establishment, their modeling tools are divided into artificial neural
networks (ANNs) [27], computational fluid dynamics (CFD) [ 28], and other simulation
software [29]. Crop growth models [30] quantitatively describe the dynamic processes of
crop growth, development, seed formation, and yield under meteorological conditions, soil
conditions, and crop management practices. Common crop growth models include the
Decision Support System for Agrotechnology Transfer (DSSAT) model [31], Gossypium Sim-
ulation (GOSSYM) model [32], Crop Environment Resource Synthesis (CERES) model [33],
Crop Growth (CROPGRO) model [34], Agricultural Production Systems Simulator (APSIM)
model [35], and World Food Studies (WOFOST) model [36]. Both greenhouse microclimate
and crop growth models have limited predictive accuracy in complex environments. The
challenge of coupling these models and improving their precision in practical applications
remains unresolved.
This study investigates the recent advancements in greenhouse control strategies and
models. Greenhouse control can be classified into three main domains: structural control,
parameter control, and control algorithms. The control algorithms are further categorized
and detailed in this research. The third chapter provides a comprehensive overview
of current greenhouse structural and parameter controls alongside a classification and
explanation of control algorithms. The fourth chapter focuses on greenhouse microclimate
models and crop growth models, classifying the former and summarizing the latter based
on simulation tools. The last chapter summarizes existing strategies and models for
greenhouse environmental control and outlines future directions for greenhouse control
and modeling. It is anticipated that this review will serve as a reference for research on
greenhouse environmental studies in China.
2. Acquisition of Document
This study employed a systematic literature review method, conducting searches
across Web of Science, Science Direct, Engineering Village, Scopus, and Google Scholar
databases for relevant publications spanning 2014 to 2023. The search keywords included
(“agricultural greenhouse” or “greenhouse”) and (“control algorithm” or “control strat-
egy”) and (“crop growth model” or “greenhouse microclimate model”). The search results


--- page 3 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 1388 3 of 23
showed a gradual increase in research in the field of greenhouses in 2014, focusing mainly
on improving productivity and conserving energy through greenhouse environment con-
trol. During the literature search, irrelevant publications were excluded, and repeat arti-
cles were removed. Finally, 107 relevant articles from the past decade were selected for
detailed study.
Figure 1 shows the temporal distribution of academic journal articles and conference
papers published from 2014 to 2023 according to the control strategy and the greenhouse
model. Between 2014 and 2018, there was a comparatively lower volume of publications.
However, in the subsequent period from 2019 to 2023, a noteworthy surge in research
output emerged, particularly concerning control strategies and greenhouse models. This
indicates an escalating involvement of scholars in the research of greenhouse control
strategies and models.
Sensors 2025, 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 24 
 
 
databases for relevant publications spanning 2014 to 2023. The search keywords included 
(“agricultural greenhouse” or “greenhouse”) and (“control algorithm” or “control strat-
egy”) and (“crop growth model” or “greenhouse microclimate model”). The search results 
showed a gradual increase in research in the ﬁeld of greenhouses in 2014, focusing mainly 
on improving productivity and conserving energy through greenhouse environment con-
trol. During the literature search, irrelevant publications were excluded, and repeat arti-
cles were removed. Finally, 107 relevant articles from the past decade were selected for 
detailed study. 
Figure 1 shows the temporal distribution of academic journal articles and conference 
papers published from 2014 to 2023 according to the control strategy and the greenhouse 
model. Between 2014 and 2018, there was a comparatively lower volume of publications. 
However, in the subsequent period from 20 19 to 2023, a noteworthy surge in research 
output emerged, particularly concerning control strategies and greenhouse models. This 
indicates an escalating involvement of scholars in the research of greenhouse control strat-
egies and models. 
 
Figure 1. Statistics of papers published from 2014 to 2023. 
3. Research on Control Strategy 
Greenhouses provide a conducive growth environment for plants, whether in cold 
winters or hot summers. Their use enables plant growth in non-traditional growing sea-
sons while continuously mitigating external environmental in ﬂuences on plant growth. 
Energy conversion in greenhouses is critical  to plant growth. By optimizing the control 
strategies of heating, cooling, lighting, and other systems, optimizing the energy conver-
sion process of greenhouses not only promotes plant growth, but also enhances the e ﬃ-
ciency of energy utilization and reduces production costs [37]. 
3.1. Structure Control 
Due to the complexity and variability of greenhouse environments, eﬀective control 
over them is of great signiﬁcance. Altering the greenhouse environment through internal 
structural control is paramount. Current structural control mainly includes shade system 
control, ventilation system control, refrigeration system control, and heating system con-
trol. 
The control of greenhouse structures mainly involves adjustments via controllers to 
achieve energy-saving objectives. Li et al. [3 8] investigated the performance of a blind-
type shading regulator that automatically ro tates semi-transparent  photovoltaic (PV) 
Figure 1. Statistics of papers published from 2014 to 2023.
3. Research on Control Strategy
Greenhouses provide a conducive growth environment for plants, whether in cold
winters or hot summers. Their use enables plant growth in non-traditional growing seasons
while continuously mitigating external environmental influences on plant growth. Energy
conversion in greenhouses is critical to plant growth. By optimizing the control strategies
of heating, cooling, lighting, and other systems, optimizing the energy conversion process
of greenhouses not only promotes plant growth, but also enhances the efficiency of energy
utilization and reduces production costs [37].
3.1. Structure Control
Due to the complexity and variability of greenhouse environments, effective control
over them is of great significance. Altering the greenhouse environment through internal
structural control is paramount. Current structural control mainly includes shade system
control, ventilation system control, refrigeration system control, and heating system control.
The control of greenhouse structures mainly involves adjustments via controllers to
achieve energy-saving objectives. Li et al. [38] investigated the performance of a blind-type
shading regulator that automatically rotates semi-transparent photovoltaic (PV) blades
installed on the greenhouse roof in response to sunlight variation. The results showed that
the system was capable of generating 13 kWh m −2 yr−1 of surplus electricity on sunny
days and partially met the electricity demand of the greenhouse on cloudy days. Xiao
et al. [39] proposed an earth–air heat exchanger (EAHE) based on the characteristics of


--- page 4 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 1388 4 of 23
greenhouse structures. They calculated the heat exchange capacity of EAHE based on
greenhouse heating and cooling loads, determining pipe length, diameter, air velocity,
and burial depth by integrating heat exchange efficiency and the number of transfer units.
Finally, they optimized the last parameters considering energy loss and construction costs.
The results showed that this innovative structure had a significant energy-saving effect
while meeting the internal temperature requirements of the greenhouse. Gutierrez-Arias
et al. [40] devised an opening and closing control strategy for side ventilation windows,
constructing a solving algorithm in MATLAB 2019a to achieve dynamic simulation of
crop–microclimate interactions. The results illustrated that adjusting the opening and
closing of these side ventilation windows effectively regulated the internal greenhouse CO2
concentration, temperature, and humidity conditions. Xu et al. [6] proposed a novel water
circulation solar collector release system designed for indoor use. This collector worked
as a heating radiator during nighttime, and achieved an average daily heat collection rate
of 72.1%. Compared with other similar products, this collector had a larger effective area,
which improved thermal efficiency and energy-saving performance. In summary, most of
the current research on greenhouse structural control focuses only on individual systems in
lighting, ventilation, cooling, and heating systems, and research on multi-system coupling
is the key to solving the problem.
3.2. Parameter Control
Control of greenhouse environmental parameters relies on controllers for direct ad-
justments within the greenhouse environment, which is a key factor in plant growth. The
primary environmental parameters of greenhouses include temperature, humidity, lighting,
CO2 concentration, and wind speed [41]. Nowadays, in parameter control studies, a great
number of scholars focus on researching temperature and humidity, while some researchers
also study other parameters [42].
Greenhouse environmental parameters can be monitored and controlled through
automated systems, using computers and controllers to achieve real-time responses to
environmental changes. This ensures optimal growing conditions for crops in a greenhouse
environment. Xiao et al. [8] used a greenhouse structural model, employing the fuzzy active
disturbance rejection control technique to regulate the temperature inside the greenhouse.
Revathi [43] applied the particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm for basic fuzzy
control and greenhouse temperature fuzzy control. Chen [44] proposed an adaptive model
predictive control method incorporating the feedback linearization technique to regulate
the temperature in the greenhouse. Liang [ 45] used model predictive control to adjust
the greenhouse temperature by changing the heater and ventilation windows. Montoya-
Rios [46] proposed a control strategy using a natural ventilation system to regulate daytime
greenhouse temperatures. Timmermans [47] suggested using advanced optical materials
for lighting control. Tang [ 48] introduced an intelligent lighting system for greenhouse
plants, providing intelligent supplementation in case of insufficient light. Selmani [ 49]
used a solar photovoltaic water pumping system for greenhouse irrigation, which changed
the humidity in the greenhouse. Sanchez-Molina [50] proposed a scheme for storing CO2
from flue gases, collecting CO2 to improve crop photosynthesis rates by supplying it to the
greenhouse. Controlling greenhouse environmental parameters can significantly improve
the plant growth environment. Future control methods may integrate multiple parameters
and use altered control algorithms to achieve precise control of complex and dynamic
greenhouse environments.


--- page 5 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 1388 5 of 23
3.3. Control Algorithms
A greenhouse environment control system is a nonlinear, multi-input, and multi-
output system. Greenhouse control mainly involves the collection of greenhouse environ-
ment and crop growth data via sensors. Afterwards, these data are utilized to formulate
control rules, which are transmitted to the controller to achieve coordination between
different control parts. Through scientific optimization and energy-saving operations, this
careful arrangement promotes changes in greenhouse environmental conditions, ultimately
promoting crop growth. Many control algorithms have been applied to the control of
greenhouse systems: for instance, Proportional–Integral–Derivative (PID) control, fuzzy
control, feedback control, adaptive control, model predictive control (MPC), and neural
network control. These control algorithms will be discussed in detail.
3.3.1. PID Control
The control of greenhouse environments is a typical control process. PID is one of
the earliest and traditionally developed control strategies in agriculture [1]. Through the
function operation of P , I, and D, the final output control instructions are used to control the
greenhouse environment to meet the growth needs of crops. The traditional PID control
principle is shown in Figure 2. Conventional PID control can only change the single factor of
greenhouse environments in the control. However, PID control is difficult to simultaneously
control multiple factors. Hu [ 51] proposed an economically tuned method for multiple
PID controllers based on a non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm, combining various
performance signs with production costs. The results showed that this controller achieved
favorable control performance at relatively lower costs. Su [17] introduced a self-tuning
parameter PID control method, validated through simulations using actual meteorological
data to demonstrate its effectiveness and control performance. The results showed that
the control system had a good control effect. Adesanya et al. [52] proposed a flexible PID
controller that employs a deep reinforcement learning (DRL) algorithm to optimize its
parameters, by tracking the setpoints and energy consumption of a greenhouse planted
with tomatoes. The results showed that the proposed PID optimization parameters using
the deep learning algorithm could reduce the energy consumption by 8.81% to 12.99%.
Sensors 2025, 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 24 
 
 
3.3. Control Algorithms 
A greenhouse environment control system is a nonlinear, multi-input, and multi-out-
put system. Greenhouse control mainly involves the collection of greenhouse environ-
ment and crop growth data via sensors. Afterwards, these data are utilized to formulate 
control rules, which are transmitted to the controller to achieve coordination between dif-
ferent control parts. Through scienti ﬁc optimization and energy -saving operations, this 
careful arrangement promotes changes in greenhouse environmental conditions, ulti-
mately promoting crop growth. Many control algorithms have been applied to the control 
of greenhouse systems: for instance, Propor tional–Integral–Derivative (PID) control, 
fuzzy control, feedback control, adaptive co ntrol, model predictive control (MPC), and 
neural network control. These control algorithms will be discussed in detail. 
3.3.1. PID Control 
The control of greenhouse environments is a typical control process. PID is one of the 
earliest and traditionally developed control strategies in agriculture [1]. Through the func-
tion operation of P, I, and D, the ﬁnal output control instructions are used to control the 
greenhouse environment to meet the growth needs of crops. The traditional PID control 
principle is shown in Figure 2. Conventional PID control can only change the single factor 
of greenhouse environments in the control. However, PID control is di ﬃcult to simulta-
neously control multiple factors. Hu [51] proposed an economically tuned method for 
multiple PID controllers based on a non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm, combining 
various performance signs with production costs. The results showed that this controller 
achieved favorable control performance at relatively lower costs. Su [17] introduced a self-
tuning parameter PID control method, validated through simulations using actual mete-
orological data to demonstrate its e ﬀectiveness and control performance. The results 
showed that the control system had a good control eﬀect. Adesanya et al. [52] proposed a 
ﬂexible PID controller that employs a deep reinforcement learning (DRL) algorithm to 
optimize its parameters, by tracking the setpoints and energy consumption of a green-
house planted with tomatoes. The results showed that the proposed PID optimization pa-
rameters using the deep learning algorith m could reduce the energy consumption by 
8.81% to 12.99%. 
 
Figure 2. Schematic diagram of PID control principle. 
3.3.2. Fuzzy Control 
Fuzzy control is a nonlinear control method. Fuzzy control does not require an accu-
rate mathematical model of the controlled object, and can control complex systems, such 
as multi-input, multi-output (MIMO), time-varying, and lag systems [12]. For the nonlin-
ear and time-varying characteristics of the greenhouse internal environment, fuzzy con-
trol has a good control eﬀect. In addressing the prolonged response time inherent in con-
ventional greenhouse PID control, Cheng et al. [53] introduced an agricultural greenhouse 
temperature control model based on fuzz y PID. This model exhibited notable a ttributes, 
Figure 2. Schematic diagram of PID control principle.
3.3.2. Fuzzy Control
Fuzzy control is a nonlinear control method. Fuzzy control does not require an accu-
rate mathematical model of the controlled object, and can control complex systems, such as
multi-input, multi-output (MIMO), time-varying, and lag systems [12]. For the nonlinear
and time-varying characteristics of the greenhouse internal environment, fuzzy control
has a good control effect. In addressing the prolonged response time inherent in conven-
tional greenhouse PID control, Cheng et al. [ 53] introduced an agricultural greenhouse
temperature control model based on fuzzy PID. This model exhibited notable attributes,
including reduced response time in temperature control and a consistent, stable temper-


--- page 6 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 1388 6 of 23
ature control effect. Its implementation demonstrated enhanced precision in regulating
greenhouse temperatures.
To adjust the temperature and humidity in the greenhouse, Riahi [ 54] designed a
multi-input and multi-output fuzzy controller, in which the ventilation, heating, and
humidification functions in the greenhouse are controlled by the motor. The greenhouse
climate is adjusted to the optimal state through a fuzzy control algorithm to control the
actuator. In addition, the model of photovoltaic power generation is established, and the
speed control of the asynchronous motor is carried out by vector control optimized by
fuzzy logic to achieve an energy-saving purpose. The photovoltaic (PV)-based ventilation
system is shown in Figure 3.
Sensors 2025, 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 24 
 
 
including reduced response time in temperature control and a consistent, stable tempera-
ture control e ﬀect. Its implementation demonstrated  enhanced precision in regulating 
greenhouse temperatures. 
To adjust the temperature and humidity in  the greenhouse, Riahi [54] designed a 
multi-input and multi-output fuzzy controller, in which the ventilation, heating, and hu-
midiﬁcation functions in the greenhouse are controlled by the motor. The greenhouse cli-
mate is adjusted to the optimal state through a fuzzy control algorithm to control the ac-
tuator. In addition, the model of photovoltaic  power generation is established, and the 
speed control of the asynchronous motor is carried out by vector control optimized by 
fuzzy logic to achieve an energy-saving purpose. The photovoltaic (PV)-based ventilation 
system is shown in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3. Schematic diagram of photovoltaic (PV)-based ventilation system. 
Xiao [8] introduced a fuzzy active disturbance rejection control method, which does 
not rely on an accurate mathematical model. This method displays commendable robust-
ness and noise immunity. Through adjustment of the skylight’s opening and thermal air 
conditioning, it performs both greenhouse temperature regulation and energy conserva-
tion. The controller’s structure is depicted in Figure 4. Mac et al. [55] introduced a deep 
learning algorithm on the basis of the fuzzy control algorithm to form an upgraded Deep 
Convolutional Generative Adversarial Network (DCGAN). The results showed that the 
use of the proposed DCGAN improved the performance of the deep learning model for 
greenhouse plant monitoring and disease detection. 
 
Figure 4. Schematic diagram of controller structure. 
3.3.3. Feedback Control 
Regarding control system design, feedback control is a commonly used method that 
shows eﬀective control performance in greenhouse applications [56]. Feedback control re-
quires a precisely deﬁned model of the controlled system and a well-crafted control algo-
rithm [57]. 
Figure 3. Schematic diagram of photovoltaic (PV)-based ventilation system.
Xiao [8] introduced a fuzzy active disturbance rejection control method, which does
not rely on an accurate mathematical model. This method displays commendable robust-
ness and noise immunity. Through adjustment of the skylight’s opening and thermal air
conditioning, it performs both greenhouse temperature regulation and energy conserva-
tion. The controller’s structure is depicted in Figure 4. Mac et al. [55] introduced a deep
learning algorithm on the basis of the fuzzy control algorithm to form an upgraded Deep
Convolutional Generative Adversarial Network (DCGAN). The results showed that the
use of the proposed DCGAN improved the performance of the deep learning model for
greenhouse plant monitoring and disease detection.
Sensors 2025, 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 24 
 
 
including reduced response time in temperature control and a consistent, stable tempera-
ture control e ﬀect. Its implementation demonstrated  enhanced precision in regulating 
greenhouse temperatures. 
To adjust the temperature and humidity in  the greenhouse, Riahi [54] designed a 
multi-input and multi-output fuzzy controller, in which the ventilation, heating, and hu-
midiﬁcation functions in the greenhouse are controlled by the motor. The greenhouse cli-
mate is adjusted to the optimal state through a fuzzy control algorithm to control the ac-
tuator. In addition, the model of photovoltaic  power generation is established, and the 
speed control of the asynchronous motor is carried out by vector control optimized by 
fuzzy logic to achieve an energy-saving purpose. The photovoltaic (PV)-based ventilation 
system is shown in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3. Schematic diagram of photovoltaic (PV)-based ventilation system. 
Xiao [8] introduced a fuzzy active disturbance rejection control method, which does 
not rely on an accurate mathematical model. This method displays commendable robust-
ness and noise immunity. Through adjustment of the skylight’s opening and thermal air 
conditioning, it performs both greenhouse temperature regulation and energy conserva-
tion. The controller’s structure is depicted in Figure 4. Mac et al. [55] introduced a deep 
learning algorithm on the basis of the fuzzy control algorithm to form an upgraded Deep 
Convolutional Generative Adversarial Network (DCGAN). The results showed that the 
use of the proposed DCGAN improved the performance of the deep learning model for 
greenhouse plant monitoring and disease detection. 
 
Figure 4. Schematic diagram of controller structure. 
3.3.3. Feedback Control 
Regarding control system design, feedback control is a commonly used method that 
shows eﬀective control performance in greenhouse applications [56]. Feedback control re-
quires a precisely deﬁned model of the controlled system and a well-crafted control algo-
rithm [57]. 
Figure 4. Schematic diagram of controller structure.
3.3.3. Feedback Control
Regarding control system design, feedback control is a commonly used method that
shows effective control performance in greenhouse applications [ 56]. Feedback control
requires a precisely defined model of the controlled system and a well-crafted control
algorithm [57].
Hoyo et al. [42] used a control strategy combining feedback linearization techniques
and quantitative feedback theory (QFT) to control the indoor temperature of greenhouses.


--- page 7 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 1388 7 of 23
The feedback linearization control strategy was designed based on the nonlinear model of
the greenhouse, and the PI controller was designed using QFT. The results showed that the
control system had satisfactory control performance under the condition of disturbance
or change in working position. To improve the performance of the cantilever sprayer in
the greenhouse, Fu et al. [58] developed an automatic control technology based on speed
feedback. It uses an auxiliary anti-drift system of wind curtain-type airflow and a variable
spray control system for adaptive fertilization and environmental monitoring. The system
was able to control the speed error within 3%. The airflow improved penetration spray,
reduced the droplets, and improved the use rate.
However, although feedback control has better accuracy, stability, and robustness,
feedback control requires accurate models and sensors with high accuracy, and the demands
for control algorithms are also relatively high.
3.3.4. Adaptive Control
Adaptive control systems have the capacity to automatically adjust themselves to ac-
count for changes in system parameters and external disturbances. They show exceptional
performance when confronted with model confusions and variations in system parameters
by displaying strong control performance in greenhouse applications [59].
Su [17] presented a parameter self-tuning PID control method. This approach involves
the early conversion of internal temperature, humidity, and CO2 concentration into four
comparable unit outputs. To ensure that the desired control performance was obtained, the
Levenberg–Marquardt (LM) algorithm was used to tune the PID parameters.
Through the system identification toolbox, Wang et al. [ 60] identified the assumed
parameter model and parameter state of the temperature in the greenhouse. The model
transfer function was established, and the category of the model was determined. Finally,
the system structure of the adaptive control was obtained, and the adaptive control of the
system was realized. Wang et al. [61] proposed an adaptive fuzzy control algorithm for
greenhouse temperature control. The adaptive control algorithm can select the appropriate
time to open the rolling curtain according to the place of greenhouse. Boughamsa [ 62]
considered the use of an adaptive T-S fuzzy model to predict future greenhouse environ-
mental conditions in a control scheme, and the use of heating and ventilating to adjust the
temperature and humidity inside the greenhouse. To accurately control the temperature
inside the greenhouse, Chen et al. [ 44] proposed an adaptive model predictive control
method combined with feedback linearization technology, and the control ability was
significantly improved. Su et al. [4] proposed an indirect adaptive fuzzy control method
for a class of MIMO nonlinear systems with unknown dynamics and actuator saturation
for greenhouse climate control issues. This method efficiently tracks the temperature and
humidity within the greenhouse while preserving control.
3.3.5. Model Predictive Control (MPC)
An advanced control technology called model predictive control (MPC) was used for
controlling dynamic systems in order to meet predetermined performance goals [63]. The
basic principle of MPC is to forecast a system’s future behavior using a mathematical model
and then produce control methods based on these forecasts [64].
Achour et al. [ 65] used MPC to propose a novel control strategy for the optimal
operation of a microgrid powered greenhouse, which can maintain the optimal greenhouse
microclimate, and can manage irrigation, lighting, ventilation, and dehumidification, and
accomplish the goal of energy conservation. Bersani et al. [66] adopted the MPC method to
keep the greenhouse’s temperature at its ideal level while consuming the least amount of
energy. Jung [5] proposed an MPC-based greenhouse temperature optimization ventilation


--- page 8 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 1388 8 of 23
system with excellent control performance, which drives the operation of several interior
windows of the greenhouse by forecasting internal temperature changes. Lin et al. [ 67]
proposed a hierarchical control strategy for the Venlo greenhouse system. The upper layer
sets different optimization learning objectives (different strategies), and the lower layer uses
MPC to track the trajectory obtained from the upper layer, and the control performance
of the MPC controller and the open-loop controller is compared. The results showed that
the MPC had a better prediction accuracy. The greenhouse climate hierarchical control
architecture is shown in Figure 5.
Sensors 2025, 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 24 
 
 
of energy. Jung [5] proposed an MPC-based greenhouse temperature optimization venti-
lation system with excellent control performa nce, which drives the operation of several 
interior windows of the greenhouse by foreca sting internal temperature changes. Lin et 
al. [67] proposed a hierarchical control strategy for the Venlo greenhouse system. The up-
per layer sets di ﬀerent optimization learning objectives (di ﬀerent strategies), and the 
lower layer uses MPC to track the trajectory obtained from the upper layer, and the control 
performance of the MPC controller and the open-loop controller is compared. The results 
showed that the MPC had a be tter prediction accuracy. The greenhouse climate hierar-
chical control architecture is shown in Figure 5. 
 
Figure 5. Schematic diagram of the structure of the greenhouse climate hierarchical control system. 
Aiming at the confusion in the greenhouse system, Mahmood et al. [68] proposed a 
data-driven robust model predictive control, which can be used for greenhouse tempera-
ture control and energy use evaluation. Compared with the basic model predictive control 
strategy, the robust model predictive contro l strategy reduced the energy consumption 
by 9.67% and 23.61% in winter and summer, respectively. Faced with the problem of ex-
cessive water use caused by traditional irrigation practices, Caceres et al. [69] proposed a 
periodic model predictive control structures for on–oﬀ irrigation. Under the conditions of 
both stable and unstable greenhouse environments, the controller had a good control ef-
fect. 
3.3.6. Neural Network Control 
Neural network control is a mach ine learning model based on arti ﬁcial neural net-
works, with multi-layer networ k parameters as the structure and most data as training 
samples [70]. The changing temperature and humidity data in the greenhouse have the 
characteristics of time series, which is consistent with the research of neural network time 
series [71]. The neural network model has strong self-organization, self-learning, and self-
adaptive ability. The neural network model can not only predict the change state of indoor 
environmental factors, but also carry out the best control through prediction [72]. 
Castaneda-Miranda et al. [73] used a multi-layer perceptron artiﬁcial neural network 
(ANN) to prevent frost in intelligent greenhouses. The system’s parameters include wind 
speed, the relative humidity of the outdoor air, total solar radiation ﬂux, and the relative 
humidity of the inside air. Its temperature forecast accuracy can approach 95%. Fourati 
[74] used an Elman neural network to mo del the greenhouse environment to achieve 
multi-neural control of the greenhouse and improve the greenhouse environment climate. 
Jung et al. [75] designed a data-based to mato greenhouse evapotranspiration (ET) and 
humidity deep learning model for the is sue of crop humidity change and crop 
Figure 5. Schematic diagram of the structure of the greenhouse climate hierarchical control system.
Aiming at the confusion in the greenhouse system, Mahmood et al. [68] proposed a
data-driven robust model predictive control, which can be used for greenhouse temperature
control and energy use evaluation. Compared with the basic model predictive control
strategy, the robust model predictive control strategy reduced the energy consumption by
9.67% and 23.61% in winter and summer, respectively. Faced with the problem of excessive
water use caused by traditional irrigation practices, Caceres et al. [69] proposed a periodic
model predictive control structures for on–off irrigation. Under the conditions of both
stable and unstable greenhouse environments, the controller had a good control effect.
3.3.6. Neural Network Control
Neural network control is a machine learning model based on artificial neural net-
works, with multi-layer network parameters as the structure and most data as training
samples [70]. The changing temperature and humidity data in the greenhouse have the
characteristics of time series, which is consistent with the research of neural network time
series [71]. The neural network model has strong self-organization, self-learning, and
self-adaptive ability. The neural network model can not only predict the change state of
indoor environmental factors, but also carry out the best control through prediction [72].
Castaneda-Miranda et al. [73] used a multi-layer perceptron artificial neural network
(ANN) to prevent frost in intelligent greenhouses. The system’s parameters include wind
speed, the relative humidity of the outdoor air, total solar radiation flux, and the relative
humidity of the inside air. Its temperature forecast accuracy can approach 95%. Fourati [74]
used an Elman neural network to model the greenhouse environment to achieve multi-
neural control of the greenhouse and improve the greenhouse environment climate. Jung
et al. [75] designed a data-based tomato greenhouse evapotranspiration (ET) and humidity
deep learning model for the issue of crop humidity change and crop transpiration prediction
in greenhouses. The test dataset was used for humidity prediction. The prediction results


--- page 9 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 1388 9 of 23
were compared with the prediction results of the traditional Recurrent Neural Network–
Long Short-Term Memory (RNN-LSTM) model, and the experiments showed that the
model had better prediction performance. The Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) neural
network is shown in Figure 6. Liu et al. [76] proposed the Google Cloud Platform–Long
Short-Term Memory (GCP-LSTM) model for greenhouse climate prediction, which can
reliably forecast greenhouse climate. Mounir et al. [77] predicted the ventilation volume
in the greenhouse through the RNN-LSTM model, and guided the opening degree of
the vent according to the size of the air volume. Wu et al. [ 78] used a neural network to
compensate the error of the temperature and humidity sensor, and the detection accuracy
of the sensor was improved. The particle swarm optimization (PSO), Back Propagation (BP)
neural network, and PID control algorithm were combined to construct the PSO-BP-PID
control algorithm. The algorithm was used to control the temperature and humidity, which
improved the response speed of the greenhouse system and reduced the overshoot. It was
able to control the temperature and humidity in the greenhouse more accurately. Belhaj [79]
introduced a deep learning algorithm on an Elman neural network to form a deep multi-
layer perceptron (MLP) neural network to control the greenhouse internal climate.
Sensors 2025, 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 24 
 
 
transpiration prediction in greenhouses. The test dataset was used for humidity predic-
tion. The prediction results were compared wi th the prediction results of the traditional 
Recurrent Neural Network–Long Short-Term Memory (RNN-LSTM) model, and the ex-
periments showed that the model had be tter prediction performance. The Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM) neural network is shown in Figure 6. Liu et al. [76] proposed the 
Google Cloud Platform–Long Short-Term Memory (GCP-LSTM) model for greenhouse 
climate prediction, which can reliably forecast greenhouse climate. Mounir et al. [77] pre-
dicted the ventilation volume in the gr eenhouse through the RNN-LSTM model, and 
guided the opening degree of the vent according to the size of the air volume. Wu et al. 
[78] used a neural network to compensate the error of the temperature and humidity sen-
sor, and the detection accuracy of the sensor was improved. The particle swarm optimi-
zation (PSO), Back Propagation (BP) neural network, and PID control algorithm were 
combined to construct the PSO-BP-PID control algorithm. The algorithm was used to con-
trol the temperature and humidity, which improved the response speed of the greenhouse 
system and reduced the overshoot. It was able  to control the temperature and humidity 
in the greenhouse more accurately. Belhaj [79]  introduced a deep learning algorithm on 
an Elman neural network to form a deep multi-layer perceptron (MLP) neural network to 
control the greenhouse internal climate. 
 
Figure 6. Schematic diagram of the LSTM neural network process. 
3.3.7. Hybrid Control 
Hybrid control is an advanced co ntrol strategy, which combines di ﬀerent types of 
control methods to better cope with the diversity, nonlinearity, and uncertainty of the sys-
tem [80]. Among the current control method s, each control method has its own ad-
vantages. Hybrid control is capable of capitalizing on the advantages of di ﬀerent control 
methods to achieve economical, convenient, and accurate control [81]. 
Castaneda-Miranda [82] introduced a defrosting control system, which was realized 
by integrating the Internet of Things (IoT) and hybrid AI methods in the greenhouse en-
vironment. The system employs an artiﬁcial neural network for greenhouse temperature 
prediction, achieving a remarkable accuracy of up to 95%. Afterwards, fuzzy control is 
employed to regulate the temperature based on the presence of frost in the greenhouse, 
and the purpose of defrost is eﬀectively realized. Ding [83] proposed a monitoring system 
based on a Programmable Logic Controller (PLC) and Supervisory Control and Data Ac-
quisition (SCADA); the system, combined with an arti ﬁcial neural network, was able to 
predict the environmental parameters for Dendrobium oﬃcinale growth and achieve real-
time monitoring and intelligent control. Mohamed [84] proposed  an Adaptive Neuro-
Figure 6. Schematic diagram of the LSTM neural network process.
3.3.7. Hybrid Control
Hybrid control is an advanced control strategy, which combines different types of
control methods to better cope with the diversity, nonlinearity, and uncertainty of the sys-
tem [80]. Among the current control methods, each control method has its own advantages.
Hybrid control is capable of capitalizing on the advantages of different control methods to
achieve economical, convenient, and accurate control [81].
Castaneda-Miranda [82] introduced a defrosting control system, which was realized
by integrating the Internet of Things (IoT) and hybrid AI methods in the greenhouse
environment. The system employs an artificial neural network for greenhouse temperature
prediction, achieving a remarkable accuracy of up to 95%. Afterwards, fuzzy control is
employed to regulate the temperature based on the presence of frost in the greenhouse, and
the purpose of defrost is effectively realized. Ding [83] proposed a monitoring system based
on a Programmable Logic Controller (PLC) and Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
(SCADA); the system, combined with an artificial neural network, was able to predict
the environmental parameters for Dendrobium officinale growth and achieve real-time
monitoring and intelligent control. Mohamed [ 84] proposed an Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy
Inference System (ANFIS), combined with genetic algorithm (GA) to adjust the controller.
According to the set value and the changing outdoor climate conditions, the temperature


--- page 10 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 1388 10 of 23
and humidity of the greenhouse system were adjusted to adapt to the changing climate
conditions in the greenhouse. The control structure is shown in Figure 7. To solve the
issue of switching between two different heating systems in the greenhouse to control the
nighttime temperature, Montoya [85] designed a hybrid model-based predictive controller.
The system dynamics were represented by a hybrid model. The model predictive hybrid
controller was used to adjust the inner temperature at night, and the optimal control signal
was calculated based on the power consumption and commutation minimization. Although
hybrid control incorporates the advantages of various control algorithms and has higher
accuracy and anti-interference capabilities, the complexity of hybrid control is also higher
than other control algorithms and is difficult to implement. Therefore, it is essential to
take into account the advantages and disadvantages of existing control algorithms in the
research of hybrid control and choose the optimal control algorithm as the basis of hybrid
control according to the characteristics of the actual problem.
Sensors 2025, 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 24 
 
 
Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS), combined wi th genetic algorithm (GA) to adjust the 
controller. According to the set value and the changing outdoor climate conditions, the 
temperature and humidity of the greenhouse system were adjusted to adapt to the chang-
ing climate conditions in the greenhouse. The control structure is shown in Figure 7. To 
solve the issue of switching between two di ﬀerent heating systems in the greenhouse to 
control the nighttime temperature, Montoya [85] designed a hybrid model-based predic-
tive controller. The system dynamics were represented by a hybrid model. The model 
predictive hybrid controller was used to adju st the inner temperature at night, and the 
optimal control signal was calculated based on the power consumption and commutation 
minimization. Although hybrid control incorporates the advantages of various control al-
gorithms and has higher accuracy and anti-interference capabilities, the complexity of hy-
brid control is also higher than other control algorithms and is di ﬃcult to implement. 
Therefore, it is essential to take into account the advantages and disadvantages of existing 
control algorithms in the research of hybrid control and choose the optimal control algo-
rithm as the basis of hybrid control according to the characteristics of the actual problem. 
 
Figure 7. Schematic diagram of control structure by using GA to tune ANFIS parameters. 
3.4. Discussion 
Over the past decade, researchers have ma inly focused on neural network control 
and model predictive control strategies in greenhouse control studies. Additionally, meth-
ods such as fuzzy control, adaptive control,  and feedback control have also been exten-
sively researched. Table 1 summarizes the advantages, disadvantages, and application 
scenarios of di ﬀerent control algorithms. In future control algorithms, neural network 
control is expected to gradually replace traditional methods. This is mainly due to the 
neural network’s ability to avoid complex mathematical models, requiring merely a por-
tion of the data for learning, and its capability to achieve accurate prediction and control-
ler adjustment. Table 2 outlines the applications of neural network control and model pre-
dictive control (MPC) algorithms in greenhouse research. The control of greenhouse en-
vironmental parameters mainly includes temperature, humidity, CO
2 concentration, light, 
and wind speed. The environmental paramete rs of greenhouses exhibit strong coupling 
characteristics. In future research, multi-parameter coupling control is expected to become 
a new research focus. 
Table 1. Advantages and disadvantages of diﬀerent control algorithms and application scenarios. 
S/N Control 
Algorithms Advantage Disadvantage Application Scenarios 
1 PID control 1. Simple  controller structure 1. Difficult to control multiple 
variables at the same time 
1. Individual parameter 
control 
2. Primary greenhouse 
control 
2 Fuzzy control 1. No need for accurate 
modeling 
1. Poor real-time performance 
2. Constrained by the rule base 
1. Multivariate greenhouse 
system 
Figure 7. Schematic diagram of control structure by using GA to tune ANFIS parameters.
3.4. Discussion
Over the past decade, researchers have mainly focused on neural network control and
model predictive control strategies in greenhouse control studies. Additionally, methods
such as fuzzy control, adaptive control, and feedback control have also been extensively
researched. Table 1 summarizes the advantages, disadvantages, and application scenarios
of different control algorithms. In future control algorithms, neural network control is ex-
pected to gradually replace traditional methods. This is mainly due to the neural network’s
ability to avoid complex mathematical models, requiring merely a portion of the data for
learning, and its capability to achieve accurate prediction and controller adjustment. Table 2
outlines the applications of neural network control and model predictive control (MPC)
algorithms in greenhouse research. The control of greenhouse environmental parameters
mainly includes temperature, humidity, CO2 concentration, light, and wind speed. The
environmental parameters of greenhouses exhibit strong coupling characteristics. In future
research, multi-parameter coupling control is expected to become a new research focus.
Table 1. Advantages and disadvantages of different control algorithms and application scenarios.
S/N Control Algorithms Advantage Disadvantage Application Scenarios
1 PID control 1. Simple controller structure
1. Difficult to control
multiple variables at the
same time
1. Individual parameter control
2. Primary greenhouse control
2 Fuzzy control 1. No need for accurate
modeling
1. Poor real-time
performance
2. Constrained by the rule
base
1. Multivariate greenhouse system
2. Control of nonlinear systems
3 Feedback control
1. Highly accurate
2. Predictable response
behavior
1. High sensor accuracy
requirements
1. Scenarios for precise
environmental control
2. Real-time control requirements


--- page 11 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 1388 11 of 23
Table 1. Cont.
S/N Control Algorithms Advantage Disadvantage Application Scenarios
4 Adaptive control
1. High system adaptive
control capability
2. Easy self-optimization
1. Initial-phase system
instability
2. Difficulty in system
development and
maintenance
1. Occasions for self-adjustment of
control strategies in response to
environmental changes
5 Model predictive
control
1. Predicting the future
dynamic behavior of the
system
2. Multi-constraint
optimization capability
1. Computational
complexity
2. High model dependency
1. Multivariate systems control
2. Complex system dynamics
6 Neural network
control
1. Good self-learning skills
2. Ability to process time series
data
1. High data demand
2. High training time and
computational resource
requirements
1. Application scenarios
combining prediction and control
2. Systems requiring adaptive
capabilities
7 Hybrid control
1. Integrating multiple control
methods
2. High control accuracy and
response speed
1. Complex design and
commissioning
2. High real-time
requirements
3. Difficult and costly to
realize
1. Multivariable and uncertain
systems
2. Systems requiring adaptive
capabilities
3. Scenarios combining prediction
and control
Table 2. Research overview of neural network control and MPC.
S/N Control
Algorithm Controlled Parameter Result of Study Year and
Reference
1 ANN Frost ANN was used for greenhouse control, and the accuracy of
temperature prediction was as high as 95%. 2017 [73]
2 MPC Temperature, humidity, light The control was able to maintain the best greenhouse
microclimate, and manage irrigation and lighting. 2020 [65]
3 MPC Temperature
The greenhouse temperature-optimized ventilation system
was able to drive the opening and closing of indoor
windows through temperature changes.
2020 [5]
4 MPC Temperature, humidity, CO2
concentration
Using the hierarchical control strategy, the greenhouse
environment was accurately predicted and controlled. 2020 [67]
5 MPC Temperature The temperature in the greenhouse was maintained by
consuming the least amount of energy. 2021 [66]
6 RNN-LSTM Humidity
The data-based tomato greenhouse evapotranspiration
(ET) and humidity deep learning model predicted the
relative humidity of the greenhouse, and the prediction
accuracy was significantly better than the traditional
RNN-LSTM.
2022 [75]
7 GCP-LSTM
Temperature, humidity, light,
CO2 concentration
soil temperature, soil humidity.
The GCP_LSTM prediction model was tested on three
different crops and compared with other prediction
models; GCP_LSTM had a better prediction accuracy.
2022 [76]
8 Robust-MPC Temperature, energy
Compared with the basic model predictive control strategy,
the robust model predictive control strategy reduced the
energy consumption by 9.67% and 23.61% in winter and
summer, respectively.
2023 [68]
9 MPC Humidity A stable control effect was achieved by using MPC to
control the irrigation system. 2023 [69]


--- page 12 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 1388 12 of 23
Table 2. Cont.
S/N Control
Algorithm Controlled Parameter Result of Study Year and
Reference
10 RNN-LSTM Ventilation volume The opening degree of the vent was guided according to
the size of the air volume. 2023 [77]
11 PSO-BP-PID Temperature, humidity
The detection accuracy of the sensor was improved, the
reaction speed of the control system was controlled, and
the overshoot was reduced.
2023 [78]
4. Research on Greenhouse Model
Greenhouse models mainly include greenhouse microclimate models and crop growth
models, which simulate various environmental parameters and crop growth in green-
houses [86]. They contribute to a better understanding of the response of agricultural
systems to climatic conditions and the potential impact of climate change on agricultural
production.
4.1. Greenhouse Microclimate Models
Greenhouse microclimate models mainly simulate environmental conditions in the
greenhouse, including factors such as temperature, humidity, CO 2 concentration, and
lighting [87]. These models can better control the growing environment of greenhouse
crops and help provide optimal growing conditions. This section describes the research
tools commonly used to construct greenhouse microclimate models, including artificial
neural network (ANN) models, computational fluid dynamics (CFD), Comsol Multiphysics
6.1 (COMSOL6.1), Matrix Laboratory 2022a (MATLAB2022a), C++, etc. Table 3 summarizes
the research tools used to construct greenhouse microclimate models.
Table 3. Overview of greenhouse microclimate modeling research tools.
S/N Simulation Tool Simulation Parameters Result Reference Year
1 CFD Transpiration,
temperature, humidity
The CFD model was used to predict the
transpiration, indoor temperature, and indoor
humidity in the greenhouse.
[88] 2018
2 COMSOL Temperature, wind
speed
Under different climatic conditions, the simulated
values of temperature and wind speed in the
greenhouse were consistent with the
experimental values.
[89] 2018
3 RNN-BP Temperature, humidity
Compared with the greenhouse prediction ability of
RNN, RNN-BP had a higher accuracy in greenhouse
temperature and humidity prediction.
[90] 2018
4 CFD Temperature, wind
speed
The CFD-2D model was established, which can
predict the temperature and wind speed in
the greenhouse.
[91] 2019
5 CFD Air current
The ventilation rate and airflow distribution in the
greenhouse with different wind speeds and different
incidence angles were analyzed. The error between
the simulated value and the experimental values
was less than 12%.
[92] 2019
6 COMSOL Temperature, light
radiation
Using the model to predict the greenhouse
environment for 24 h and 7 days, the temperature
and light radiation at different positions and
different times in the greenhouse were
accurately predicted.
[93] 2019


--- page 13 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 1388 13 of 23
Table 3. Cont.
S/N Simulation Tool Simulation Parameters Result Reference Year
7 CFD Light, temperature
A higher greenhouse temperature than outdoor
temperature during the day was simulated, and a
fan was used to assist natural ventilation for cooling.
[94] 2019
8 MATLAB Temperature
A dynamic model of air temperature in greenhouse
was established, which accurately predicted the
change in temperature in the greenhouse.
[95] 2020
9 MATLAB Temperature
The transparent greenhouse and heat insulation
greenhouse were simulated, and the simulated
values were in good agreement with the
actual values.
[96] 2020
10 RNN-LSTM Temperature, humidity,
CO2 concentration
The RNN-LSTM model had the highest prediction
accuracy for temperature, humidity, and CO2
concentration at 30 min.
[97] 2020
11 CFD Temperature, heater
position, heater direction
Auxiliary equipment was installed to heat the
greenhouse, and the influence of the heater position
and outlet direction on the greenhouse temperature
was simulated.
[98] 2020
12 LSTM Temperature, humidity
The prediction ability of the LSTM model was better
than that of the RNN and BP-RNN models; the
RMSE of the LSTM model for predicting
temperature and humidity in the greenhouse was
0.16 and 0.62, respectively.
[99] 2020
13 CFD Wind speed,
temperature, humidity
The box-type evaporative cooler (BTEC) was used as
the backbone of the HVAC system, and the
environmental parameters in the greenhouse were
monitored for 20 h. The results showed that the
parameters in the greenhouse were within the
required range.
[100] 2021
14 BP Temperature
The BP neural network demonstrated high accuracy
for greenhouse temperature prediction in
different seasons.
[101] 2022
15 LSTM Temperature, humidity,
CO2 concentration
The model was transferred to other greenhouses,
and demonstrated good prediction accuracy for
indoor temperature, humidity, and
CO2 concentration.
[102] 2022
16 LSTM Temperature, humidity
The model predicted the temperature and humidity
of the four time periods. The greenhouse prediction
error of the four prediction layers was [−2.1,2.9] ◦C,
and the humidity prediction error of the four
prediction layers was [−6.9,4.4]%.
[103] 2023
4.1.1. Artificial Neural Network
In recent years, research on greenhouse microclimate models has extensively employed
ANN technology. ANN models forecast the microclimate in greenhouses, provide future
greenhouse climate data, and guide greenhouse control. Because of their precise predictive
abilities, ANNs have gained widespread acclaim among research scholars.
ANN is a key tool for data analysis and forecasting in greenhouse agriculture, using
strong learning capabilities and the ability to identify complexities. They contribute to the
effective management and optimization of agricultural production. Jung [97] developed
ANN, Nonlinear Autoregressive with Exogenous Inputs (NARX), and RNN-LSTM models
to forecast temperature, humidity, and CO2 concentration for crop growth in greenhouses.
The results demonstrated that the RNN-LSTM prediction model exhibited the highest accu-


--- page 14 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 1388 14 of 23
racy within a 30 min timeframe. Wang et al. [90] introduced a dynamic BP algorithm model
based on recursive neural networks, and compared it with RNN neural networks. The
findings showed the RNN-BP prediction model exhibited superior predictive performance
for temperature and humidity in the greenhouse. Gharghory et al. [99] proposed a recursive
neural network prediction model based on Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), and com-
pared its predictive values with the traditional BP-ANN prediction model. The variance
coefficient R2 of the LSTM prediction model exceeded 0.997, indicating superior predictive
accuracy compared to the traditional BP-ANN model. Zhao et al. [102] introduced a climate
prediction model based on LSTM to forecast temperature, humidity, and CO2 concentration
in greenhouses. Their predictions, conducted across various greenhouse settings, consis-
tently demonstrated favorable forecast accuracy. Yang et al. [103] developed a Feedforward
Attention Mechanism–LSTM (FAM-LSTM) model to forecast temperature and humidity in
solar greenhouses. This model comprehensively incorporates both internal and external
environmental factors that affect crop growth. Comparative analysis with other prediction
models showed that FAM-LSTM had excellent predictive accuracy. Liu [ 101] used BP
neural networks and stepwise regression to establish microclimate prediction models for
different seasons in mushroom greenhouses. Through the comparative analysis of the two
prediction algorithms, it was discovered that the prediction accuracy of BP neural network
model was significantly higher than that of stepwise regression model.
4.1.2. Computational Fluid Dynamics
CFD is a simulation and modeling technique known for its high accuracy in predicting
fluid flow inside or outside structures and equipment [ 104]. In simulating greenhouse
microclimates, CFD is mainly used to model the dynamic fluid conditions in the greenhouse,
demonstrating good applicability.
CFD simulation techniques enable accurate modeling of environmental data in green-
houses, to better understand and control the greenhouse climate. This optimization im-
proves crop growing conditions and increases production efficiency. In relevant research,
Villagran [91] adopted CFD to simulate airflow and ventilation in three commercial green-
houses in the high Andean tropics region. They developed a transient CFD-2D model,
which was solved using the finite volume method. The results showed that the model can
effectively predict greenhouse temperature and wind speed. Bouhoun et al. [88] developed
a two-dimensional transient CFD model considering the interaction between crops and
the microclimate in the greenhouse. By analyzing moisture balance conditions under both
enough and restricted water scenarios, the results indicated that the model could accurately
predict transpiration, indoor temperature, and humidity under these two moisture condi-
tions. Saberian [94] established a three-dimensional CFD model to simulate airflow and
heat transfer in greenhouse. Considering solar radiation loads and local wind directions,
the model predicted daily microclimate variations in the greenhouse. It accurately fore-
casted changes in solar heat loads, identified periods when indoor temperatures exceeded
ambient temperatures, and proposed cooling strategies using fan-assisted natural ventila-
tion during specific time frames for cold-climate cultivation regions. Ernesto [ 100] used
CFD simulations to forecast temperature variations in greenhouses with supplementary
heating equipment. The study estimated the energy consumption required to maintain
the greenhouse climate. Chalill [100] conducted full-scale simulations of environmental
parameters for crops in the greenhouse, predicting the spatial distribution of crop growth
parameters. The simulated values closely aligned with experimental data. Li [ 105] es-
tablished a greenhouse microclimate model by introducing a hybrid computational fluid
dynamics–evolutionary algorithm method. This model incorporated the influence of envi-
ronmental factors on crop growth, deriving optimal crop growth environment parameters.


--- page 15 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 1388 15 of 23
The accuracy of the CFD simulation was verified by comparing the predicted results with
the experimental results. Finally, Pakari [92] employed CFD simulations to assess the venti-
lation efficacy of greenhouses equipped with wind towers. By analyzing airflow exchange
rates and distributions under varying wind speeds and incident angle conditions, the
results indicated that the simulated wind speeds aligned with experimental measurements
within a 12% margin.
4.1.3. Other Simulation Software
Research on simulating greenhouse microclimates mainly focuses on CFD and ANN.
Additionally, some researchers use software such as COMSOL and MATLAB, while
previous studies have also used programming languages such as C++ and Fortran to
construct models.
Ma [93] used COMSOL to establish a greenhouse microclimate model to predict tem-
peratures and light radiation at different locations and time intervals. Comparing the
predicted values with actual ones, the simulation accurately forecasted the environment
within the greenhouse. Sciuto [ 89] used COMSOL to construct a model to study the ef-
ficiency of greenhouse Heating Ventilation and Air Conditioning (HVAC) systems. The
simulation was carried out under different climatic conditions, and the results showed that
the simulated values of temperature and wind speed were consistent with the experimental
values. Yau [ 95] designed a dynamic model for the internal air temperature of a solar
greenhouse in the MATLAB/Simulink environment. This model incorporated factors such
as solar radiation and surrounding temperature to formulate an energy balance equa-
tion. The simulation precisely predicted the change in temperature inside the greenhouse.
Katzin [106] introduced a supplementary lighting model for greenhouses using MATLAB.
This model analyzed the impact of supplementary lighting on greenhouse climates and
crops, and compared differences between high-pressure sodium lamps and light-emitting
diode lamps. It also predicted greenhouse heating requirements. The results demonstrated
a prediction error of 8–51 Wm−2 for the greenhouse heating demand. Ali [96] developed a
dynamic model for greenhouse thermal behavior using MATLAB/SIMULINK R2017b. This
model simulated the variations in greenhouse air temperature considering both transparent
and insulated greenhouses. By comparing experimental data with simulation values, the
results indicated a close match between the simulated and actual values.
4.2. Crop Growth Model
Crop growth models are mainly based on the developmental patterns and produc-
tivity formation of crops to establish mechanistic models of crop growth. These models
simulate the growth and development of various plant organs (leaves, stems, roots, etc.),
photosynthesis, and nutrient transport. By promoting improved regulation of crop growth,
they can predict the processes of crop growth, development, yield, and quality formation.
The fundamental model of crop growth is illustrated in Figure 8.
Researchers have employed various crop growth models to simulate and predict the
growth conditions of different crops under diverse environmental settings. These models
are rooted in different theories and methods, which are beneficial for simulating and
predicting crop growth conditions. Huang [107] used the WOFOST crop growth model to
assess the yield of winter wheat. They compared three leaf area index (LAI) datasets with
different temporal and spatial resolutions and found that assimilating the Kalman filter
algorithm (KF) and LAI into the WOFOST model can significantly improve the accuracy
of crop yield predictions. Whish [35] designed a crop growth model integrated with the
Agricultural Production Systems simulator (APSIM) in DYMEX. They further studied
biological constraints during crop growth by advancing the development of the APSIM


--- page 16 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 1388 16 of 23
model and investigating how fungal populations reduce the crop leaf area. Alderman [34]
used the Cropgro crop growth model to simulate the growth and development of Pigeonpea.
They adjusted the parameters of the growth model to suit Pigeonpea growth and validated
it using datasets. The study demonstrated that Cropgro can effectively simulate the growth
and development process of Pigeonpea. Ma [ 108] combined the parameter estimation
software PEST V3 with the DSSAT V4.7 crop growth model. They adopted the newly
developed DSSAT-PEST package to automatically optimize crop parameters and compared
three parameter optimization methods. The results indicated that DSSAT-PEST provided an
accurate and effective method for estimating crop genetic parameters, which significantly
improved efficiency and accuracy. Boote [ 109] used the Cropgro crop growth model
to simulate carinata growth. Through the analysis of growth data from three sites and
conducting sensitivity analyses, they developed the Cropgro–carinata crop growth model.
This model accurately simulated climate parameters, soil characteristics, and growth
traits during crop growth. Compared to the experimental results, the improved model
demonstrated strong abilities in simulating the dynamic growth of crops. To improve
resource use in crops, Wu [110] developed a cross-scale model by coupling photosynthesis
and crop growth models to provide clearer insights into the impact of photosynthesis on the
environment and crop growth. This model provides technical support for promoting crop
growth. Graefe et al. [111] proposed a novel leaf canopy photosynthesis model focusing
on the growth mechanism of crop leaves. This model can predict the light adaptation
capability of tomato crops over a two-month period. Nomura et al. [112] proposed a method
integrating canopy photosynthesis model and image analysis to estimate greenhouse air
quality. By focusing on the crop canopy region, they constructed an energy balance equation
including single-leaf photosynthesis, stomatal conductance, and mass transfer. This method
allows the long-term estimation of spinach photosynthesis rates and transpiration rates
under different calcium levels. Chen et al. [ 113] developed a maize growth model to
investigate crop growth dynamics under different soil moisture and coverage conditions.
The model simulates crop growth rates, crop yield, and water use efficiency during both
day and night with high simulation accuracy.
Sensors 2025, 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 24 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Structure ﬂow chart of crop growth model. 
Researchers have employed various crop growth models to simulate and predict the 
growth conditions of diﬀerent crops under diverse environmental settings. These models 
are rooted in diﬀerent theories and methods, which are beneﬁcial for simulating and pre-
dicting crop growth conditions. Huang [107 ] used the WOFOST crop growth model to 
assess the yield of winter wheat. They compared three leaf area index (LAI) datasets with 
diﬀerent temporal and spatial resolutions and found that assimilating the Kalman ﬁlter 
algorithm (KF) and LAI into the WOFOST model can signi ﬁcantly improve the accuracy 
of crop yield predictions. Wh ish [35] designed a crop growth model integrated with the 
Agricultural Production Systems simulator (APSIM) in DYMEX. They further studied bi-
ological constraints during crop growth by advancing the development of the APSIM 
model and investigating how fungal populations reduce the crop leaf area. Alderman [34] 
used the Cropgro crop growth model to simulate the growth and development of Pigeon-
pea. They adjusted the parameters of the growth model to suit Pigeonpea growth and 
validated it using datasets. The study demonstrated that Cropgro can eﬀectively simulate 
the growth and development process of Pigeonpea. Ma [108] combined the parameter es-
timation software PEST V3 with the DSSAT V4.7 crop growth model. They adopted the 
newly developed DSSAT-PEST package to automatically optimize crop parameters and 
compared three parameter optimization methods. The results indicated that DSSAT-PEST 
provided an accurate and eﬀective method for estimating crop genetic parameters, which 
signiﬁcantly improved eﬃciency and accuracy. Boote [109] used the Cropgro crop growth 
model to simulate carinata growth. Through the analysis of growth data from three sites 
and conducting sensitivity analyses, they de veloped the Cropgro–carinata crop growth 
model. This model accurately simulated climate parameters, soil characteristics, and 
growth traits during crop growth. Compared to the experimental results, the improved 
model demonstrated strong abilities in simulating the dynamic growth of crops. To im-
prove resource use in crops, Wu [110] developed a cross-scale model by coupling photo-
synthesis and crop growth models to provide clearer insights into the impact of photo-
synthesis on the environment and crop growth. This model provides technical support for 
promoting crop growth. Graefe et al. [111] proposed a novel leaf canopy photosynthesis 
model focusing on the growth mechanism of crop leaves. This model can predict the light 
adaptation capability of tomato crops over a two-month period. Nomura et al. [112] pro-
posed a method integrating canopy photosynthesis model and image analysis to estimate 
greenhouse air quality. By focusing on the crop canopy region, they constructed an energy 
Figure 8. Structure flow chart of crop growth model.
4.3. Discussion
Greenhouse microclimate models typically focus on simulating internal environmental
parameters, mainly using ANN, CFD, COMSOL, and similar software for model construc-


--- page 17 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 1388 17 of 23
tion. These models mainly focus on simulating temperature, humidity, and illumination
in the greenhouse. However, there is a lack of simulation about CO 2 concentration and
crop transpiration rates. A comprehensive greenhouse microclimate model should include
the simulation of all environmental parameters in the greenhouse. Crop growth models
simulate crop growth, dynamic environments, and the growth and development of dif-
ferent plant organs. They also provide good predictive accuracy for yield and quality.
However, current crop growth models still rely on empirical data, which affects their
universality [114,115]. Some crop growth models have integrated pest and disease models,
mechanistically explaining the impact of harmful organisms on crop growth. Nevertheless,
research on economic and sociocultural aspects within these models is still insufficient.
In addition, the coupling of greenhouse microclimate models and crop growth models
is understudied, as the environmental parameters of greenhouse microclimate models
can have an effect on crop growth (e.g., the effects of temperature, humidity, and CO 2
concentration on transpiration and photosynthesis), and similarly, the crop growth process
can change the environmental parameters of greenhouse microclimate. Therefore, future
research should focus on integrating greenhouse microclimate models and crop growth
models to form more comprehensive greenhouse microclimate models that take into ac-
count economic and sociocultural factors to create more comprehensive, harmonized, and
universally applicable crop growth models.
5. Conclusions and Foresight
This review includes studies on greenhouse control strategies, greenhouse microcli-
mate models, and crop growth models over the past decade. The summary is as follows:
1. Regarding greenhouse control strategies, this paper extensively studies greenhouse
structural control, environmental parameter control, and control algorithms. In terms
of greenhouse structural control, it mainly focuses on heating systems, ventilation sys-
tems, and cooling system control. In terms of parameter control, it develops from early
temperature and humidity control to supplementary lighting and CO2 enrichment to
improve photosynthetic efficiency of crops. In terms of greenhouse environmental
control algorithms, the research on the greenhouse environment control algorithm
indicates that PID control is the simplest and most widely used method among vari-
ous control methods. However, with the increasing demand for greenhouse control,
PID control is no longer sufficient. In recent years, neural network control and model
predictive control have become a hot research topic, and a substantial number of
studies have studied these two control methods.
2. In the greenhouse modeling, there are mainly two categories: the greenhouse microcli-
mate model and the crop growth model. The greenhouse microclimate model involves
the simulation of internal environmental parameters. There is a copious amount of
literature that uses tools such as ANN and CFD to simulate the greenhouse microcli-
mate. This modeling mainly includes the simulation of temperature, humidity, and
light intensity in the greenhouse environment. On the other hand, the crop growth
model mainly focuses on simulating the growth mechanisms of crops, investigating
their growth dynamics, yield, and related aspects. Among these models, the WOFOST
model has had a significant impact and has been widely applied in global food pro-
duction research. Currently, most crop growth models predominantly emphasize the
growth of crops, and there is relatively limited research to understand the influence
of pests and diseases on crop growth, as well as the impact of socioeconomic factors.
With the continuous progress of science and technology, future greenhouse control
strategies and models are expected to exhibit a trend towards the integration of multiple
models. Figure 9 provides an outline of the key areas for future research.


--- page 18 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 1388 18 of 23
Sensors 2025, 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 18 of 24 
 
 
growth model mainly focuses on simulating the growth mechanisms of crops, inves-
tigating their growth dynamics, yield, and related aspects. Among these models, the 
WOFOST model has had a signiﬁcant impact and has been widely applied in global 
food production research. Currently, most crop growth models predominantly em-
phasize the growth of crops, and there is relatively limited research to understand 
the inﬂuence of pests and diseases on crop grow th, as well as the impact of socioec-
onomic factors. 
With the continuous progress of science and technology, future greenhouse control 
strategies and models are expected to exhibit a trend towards the integration of multiple 
models. Figure 9 provides an outline of the key areas for future research. 
 
Figure 9. Schematic diagram of future research direction. 
3. Coupling of Intelligent Control Technologies 
With the rapid development of artiﬁcial intelligence and big data, the future will wit-
ness the integration of ANN with various optimization algorithms. This coupling will im-
prove the prediction accuracy of ANN and use optimization algorithms to seek the best 
solution of system control parameters and decision variables. The control precision of 
greenhouse can be improved signi ﬁcantly by combining di ﬀerent control methods and 
maximizing the utilization of their respective advantages. 
4. Multi-Scale Model Coupling 
Figure 9. Schematic diagram of future research direction.
3. Coupling of Intelligent Control Technologies
With the rapid development of artificial intelligence and big data, the future will
witness the integration of ANN with various optimization algorithms. This coupling will
improve the prediction accuracy of ANN and use optimization algorithms to seek the best
solution of system control parameters and decision variables. The control precision of
greenhouse can be improved significantly by combining different control methods and
maximizing the utilization of their respective advantages.
4. Multi-Scale Model Coupling
In the future, crop growth models will surpass singular crop growth and yield simula-
tions by integrating with greenhouse microclimate models. Additionally, incorporating
remote sensing techniques into greenhouse models, as well as the consideration of factors
such as pests, diseases, socioeconomic aspects, and human-related factors, will facilitate
multi-scale integration of different models. These scales encompass global, regional, and
local perspectives, fundamentally improving the universality and accuracy of the models.
5. Digital Twin Technology
The future application of digital twin technology in the greenhouse field is anticipated
to expand significantly. This technology utilizes mathematical modeling and simulation to


--- page 19 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 1388 19 of 23
analyze greenhouse systems to improve agricultural production, resource sustainability,
and energy conservation. Digital twin technology not only simulates greenhouse envi-
ronments but also models crop growth. It optimizes energy utilization in greenhouses
and improves greenhouse structures. In addition, it shows great promise for training and
educating greenhouse management personnel. The prospects for digital twin technology
in the greenhouse sector are exceedingly promising.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, S.C.; methodology, A.L.; software, F.T.; investigation,
S.C.; data curation, P .H.; writing—original draft preparation, S.C.; writing—review and editing, P .Y.;
visualization, S.C.; supervision, Y.L.; project administration, P .Y. All authors have read and agreed to
the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
1. Zhang, S.; Guo, Y.; Zhao, H.; Wang, Y.; Chow, D.; Fang, Y. Methodologies of control strategies for improving energy efficiency in
agricultural greenhouses. J. Clean. Prod. 2020, 274, 122695. [CrossRef]
2. Iddio, E.; Wang, L.; Thomas, Y.; McMorrow, G.; Denzer, A. Energy efficient operation and modeling for greenhouses: A literature
review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2020, 117, 109480. [CrossRef]
3. van Beveren, P .J.M.; Bontsema, J.; van Straten, G.; van Henten, E.J. Optimal control of greenhouse climate using minimal energy
and grower defined bounds. Appl. Energy 2015, 159, 509–519. [CrossRef]
4. Su, Y.; Xu, L.; Li, D. Adaptive Fuzzy Control of a Class of MIMO Nonlinear System With Actuator Saturation for Greenhouse
Climate Control Problem. IEEE T rans. Autom. Sci. Eng. 2016, 13, 772–788. [CrossRef]
5. Jung, D.-H.; Kim, H.-J.; Kim, J.Y.; Lee, T.S.; Park, S.H. Model Predictive Control via Output Feedback Neural Network for
Improved Multi-Window Greenhouse Ventilation Control.Sensors 2020, 20, 1756. [CrossRef]
6. Xu, W.; Song, W.; Ma, C. Performance of a water-circulating solar heat collection and release system for greenhouse heating using
an indoor collector constructed of hollow polycarbonate sheets. J. Clean. Prod. 2020, 253, 119918. [CrossRef]
7. Sun, X.; Yang, H.; Liu, Q.-F.; Liu, Y.-H. Event-triggered control for greenhouse temperature under natural ventilation based on
computational fluid dynamics. Syst. Sci. Control Eng. 2021, 9, 93–101. [CrossRef]
8. Fei, X.; Xiao-Long, W.; Yong, X. Development of Energy Saving and Rapid Temperature Control Technology for Intelligent
Greenhouses. IEEE Access 2021, 9, 29677–29685. [CrossRef]
9. Gerasimov, D.N.; Lyzlova, M.V . Adaptive control of microclimate in greenhouses.J. Comput. Syst. Sci. Int. 2014, 53, 896–907.
[CrossRef]
10. Liu, R.; Guzman, J.L.; Garcia-Manas, F.; Li, M. Selective temperature and humidity control strategy for a chinese solar greenhouse
with an event-based approach. Rev. Iberoam. Autom ática Informática Ind. 2023, 20, 150–161. [CrossRef]
11. Mishra, K.; Stanghellini, C.; Hemming, S. Technology and Materials for Passive Manipulation of the Solar Spectrum in Green-
houses. Adv. Sustain. Syst. 2023, 7, 2200503. [CrossRef]
12. Chaudhary, G.; Kaur, S.; Mehta, B.; Tewani, R. Observer based fuzzy and PID controlled smart greenhouse.J. Stat. Manag. Syst.
2019, 22, 393–401. [CrossRef]
13. Li, Y.; Ding, Y.; Li, D.; Miao, Z. Automatic carbon dioxide enrichment strategies in the greenhouse: A review.Biosyst. Eng. 2018,
171, 101–119. [CrossRef]
14. Espinoza, K.; Valera, D.L.; Torres, J.A.; Lopez, A.; Molina-Aiz, F.D. An Auto-Tuning PI Control System for an Open-Circuit
Low-Speed Wind Tunnel Designed for Greenhouse Technology.Sensors 2015, 15, 19723–19749. [CrossRef]
15. Santolini, E.; Pulvirenti, B.; Benni, S.; Barbaresi, L.; Torreggiani, D.; Tassinari, P . Numerical study of wind-driven natural
ventilation in a greenhouse with screens. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2018, 149, 41–53. [CrossRef]
16. Ferrante, A.; Mariani, L. Agronomic Management for Enhancing Plant Tolerance to Abiotic Stresses: High and Low Values of
Temperature, Light Intensity, and Relative Humidity.Horticulturae 2018, 4, 21. [CrossRef]
17. Su, Y.; Yu, Q.; Zeng, L. Parameter Self-Tuning PID Control for Greenhouse Climate Control Problem. IEEE Access 2020, 8,
186157–186171. [CrossRef]
18. Yao, J. Applications of Fuzzy Control in Greenhouse Intelligent Control System. In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference
on Information Sciences, Machinery, Materials and Energy (ICISMME), Chongqing, China, 11–13 April 2015; pp. 756–759.
19. Mavkov, B.; Strecker, T.; Zecchin, A.C.; Cantoni, M. Modeling and Control of Pipeline Networks Supplied by Automated Irrigation
Channels. J. Irrig. Drain. Eng. 2022, 148, 04022015. [CrossRef]


--- page 20 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 1388 20 of 23
20. Wang, Y.; Lu, Y.; Xiao, R. Application of Nonlinear Adaptive Control in Temperature of Chinese Solar Greenhouses.Electronics
2021, 10, 1582. [CrossRef]
21. Lin, D.; Zhang, L.; Xia, X. Model predictive control of a Venlo-type greenhouse system considering electrical energy, water and
carbon dioxide consumption. Appl. Energy 2021, 298, 117163. [CrossRef]
22. Manonmani, A.; Thyagarajan, T.; Elango, M.; Sutha, S. Modelling and control of greenhouse system using neural networks. T rans.
Inst. Meas. Control 2018, 40, 918–929. [CrossRef]
23. Escamilla-Garcia, A.; Soto-Zarazua, G.M.; Toledano-Ayala, M.; Rivas-Araiza, E.; Gastelum-Barrios, A. Applications of Artificial
Neural Networks in Greenhouse Technology and Overview for Smart Agriculture Development. Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 3835.
[CrossRef]
24. Favela, A.; Capriles, D. Hybrid System Control Using Discrete State Space Analysis. IEEE Lat. Am. T rans. 2017, 15, 1027–1033.
[CrossRef]
25. Mirzamohammadi, S.; Jabarzadeh, A.; Shahrabi, M.S. Long-term planning of supplying energy for greenhouses using renewable
resources under uncertainty. J. Clean. Prod. 2020, 264, 121611. [CrossRef]
26. Guo, Y.; Zhao, H.; Zhang, S.; Wang, Y.; Chow, D. Modeling and optimization of environment in agricultural greenhouses for
improving cleaner and sustainable crop production. J. Clean. Prod. 2021, 285, 124843. [CrossRef]
27. Jiankun, G.; Yanfei, L.; Zengjin, L.; Xuewen, G.; Cundong, X. Comparing the performance of greenhouse crop transpiration
prediction models based on ANNs. J. Environ. Biol. 2019, 40, 418–426. [CrossRef]
28. Bazgaou, A.; Fatnassi, H.; Bouharroud, R.; Tiskatine, R.; Wifaya, A.; Demrati, H.; Bammou, L.; Aharoune, A.; Bouirden, L. CFD
Modeling of the Microclimate in a Greenhouse Using a Rock Bed Thermal Storage Heating System. Horticulturae 2023, 9, 183.
[CrossRef]
29. Cakir, U.; Sahin, E. Using solar greenhouses in cold climates and evaluating optimum type according to sizing, position and
location: A case study. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2015, 117, 245–257. [CrossRef]
30. Li, Y.; Zhou, Q.; Zhou, J.; Zhang, G.; Chen, C.; Wang, J. Assimilating remote sensing information into a coupled hydrology-crop
growth model to estimate regional maize yield in arid regions. Ecol. Model. 2014, 291, 15–27. [CrossRef]
31. Baishya, A.; Mishra, A.; Sengupta, S. Modelling and Assessment of Climate Change Impact on Rainfed Rice Cultivation in a
Sub-humid Subtropical Region. Agric. Res. 2023, 13, 85–95. [CrossRef]
32. Beegum, S.; Timlin, D.; Reddy, K.R.; Reddy, V .; Sun, W.; Wang, Z.; Fleisher, D.; Ray, C. Improving the cotton simulation model,
GOSSYM, for soil, photosynthesis, and transpiration processes. Sci. Rep. 2023, 13, 7314. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Zha, H.; Lu, J.; Li, Y.; Miao, Y.; Kusnierek, K.; Batchelor, W.D. In-season calibration of the CERES-Rice model using proximal
active canopy sensing data for yield prediction. In Proceedings of the 13th European Conference on Precision Agriculture (ECPA),
Budapest, Hungary, 18–22 July 2021; pp. 927–932.
34. Alderman, P .D.; Boote, K.J.; Jones, J.W.; Bhatia, V .S. Adapting the CSM-CROPGRO model for pigeonpea using sequential
parameter estimation. Field Crops Res. 2015, 181, 1–15. [CrossRef]
35. Whish, J.P .M.; Herrmann, N.I.; White, N.A.; Moore, A.D.; Kriticos, D.J. Integrating pest population models with biophysical crop
models to better represent the farming system. Environ. Model. Softw. 2015, 72, 418–425. [CrossRef]
36. de Wit, A.; Boogaard, H.; Fumagalli, D.; Janssen, S.; Knapen, R.; van Kraalingen, D.; Supit, I.; van der Wijngaart, R.; van Diepen,
K. 25 years of the WOFOST cropping systems model. Agric. Syst. 2019, 168, 154–167. [CrossRef]
37. Zhang, M.; Yan, T.; Wang, W.; Jia, X.; Wang, J.; Klemes, J.J. Energy-saving design and control strategy towards modern sustainable
greenhouse: A review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2022, 164, 112602. [CrossRef]
38. Li, Z.; Yano, A.; Yoshioka, H. Feasibility study of a blind-type photovoltaic roof-shade system designed for simultaneous
production of crops and electricity in a greenhouse. Appl. Energy 2020, 279, 115853. [CrossRef]
39. Xiao, J.; Hu, Y.; Wang, Q.; Li, J. Structural design method, validation, and performance analysis of an earth-air heat exchanger for
greenhouses. Geothermics 2023, 111, 102718. [CrossRef]
40. Gutierrez-Arias, E.M.; Flores-Mena, J.E.; Pere-Osorio, G.; Morin-Castillo, M.M.; Pantle-Cuatle, G.; Cordova-Gutierrez, E.J. Design
and simulation of a control for the opening and closing of the side ventilation windows in a greenhouse. Rev. Mex. Fis. 2021, 67,
100–108. [CrossRef]
41. Chen, W.-H.; You, F. Semiclosed Greenhouse Climate Control Under Uncertainty via Machine Learning and Data-Driven Robust
Model Predictive Control. IEEE T rans. Control Syst. T echnol.2022, 30, 1186–1197. [CrossRef]
42. Hoyo, A.; Moreno, J.C.; Guzman, J.L.; Rodriguez, F. Robust QFT-Based Feedback Linearization Controller of the Greenhouse
Diurnal Temperature Using Natural Ventilation.IEEE Access 2019, 7, 64148–64161. [CrossRef]
43. Revathi, S.; Sivakumaran, N. Fuzzy Based Temperature Control of Greenhouse. In Proceedings of the 4th IFAC Conference
on Advances in Control and Optimization of Dynamical Systems (ACODS 2016), Tiruchirappalli, India, 1–5 February 2016;
pp. 549–554.


--- page 21 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 1388 21 of 23
44. Chen, L.; Du, S.; Liang, M.; He, Y. Adaptive Feedback Linearization-based Predictive Control for Greenhouse Temperature.
In Proceedings of the 6th International-Federation-of-Automatic-Control (IFAC) Conference on Bio-Robotics (BIOROBOTICS),
Beijing, China, 13–15 July 2018; pp. 784–789.
45. Liang, M.-H.; Chen, L.-J.; He, Y.-F.; Du, S.-F. Greenhouse temperature predictive control for energy saving using switch actuators.
In Proceedings of the 6th International-Federation-of-Automatic-Control (IFAC) Conference on Bio-Robotics (BIOROBOTICS),
Beijing, China, 13–15 July 2018; pp. 747–751.
46. Montoya-Rios, A.P .; Garcia-Manas, F.; Guzman, J.L.; Rodriguez, F. Simple Tuning Rules for Feedforward Compensators Applied
to Greenhouse Daytime Temperature Control Using Natural Ventilation.Agronomy 2020, 10, 1327. [CrossRef]
47. Timmermans, G.H.; Hemming, S.; Baeza, E.; van Thoor, E.A.J.; Schenning, A.P .H.J.; Debije, M.G. Advanced Optical Materials for
Sunlight Control in Greenhouses. Adv. Opt. Mater. 2020, 8, 2000738. [CrossRef]
48. Tang, Y.; Jia, M.; Mei, Y.; Yu, Y.; Zhang, J.; Tang, R.; Song, K. 3D intelligent supplement light illumination using hybrid sunlight
and LED for greenhouse plants. Optik 2019, 183, 367–374. [CrossRef]
49. Selmani, A.; Outanoute, M.; Oubehar, H.; Ed-Dahhak, A.; Lachhab, A.; Guerbaoui, M.; Bouchikhi, B. An Embedded Solar-Powered
Irrigation System Based on a Cascaded Fuzzy Logic Controller. Asian J. Control 2019, 21, 1941–1951. [CrossRef]
50. Sanchez-Molina, J.A.; Reinoso, J.V .; Acien, F.G.; Rodriguez, F.; Lopez, J.C. Development of a biomass-based system for nocturnal
temperature and diurnal CO2 concentration control in greenhouses. Biomass Bioenergy 2014, 67, 60–71. [CrossRef]
51. Hu, H.G.; Xu, L.H.; Goodman, E.D.; Zeng, S.W. NSGA-II-based nonlinear PID controller tuning of greenhouse climate for
reducing costs and improving performances. Neural Comput. Appl. 2014, 24, 927–936. [CrossRef]
52. Adesanya, M.A.; Obasekore, H.; Rabiu, A.; Na, W.-H.; Ogunlowo, Q.O.; Akpenpuun, T.D.; Kim, M.-H.; Kim, H.-T.; Kang,
B.-Y.; Lee, H.-W. Deep reinforcement learning for PID parameter tuning in greenhouse HVAC system energy Optimization: A
TRNSYS-Python cosimulation approach. Expert Syst. Appl. 2024, 252, 124126. [CrossRef]
53. Cheng, Y. Research on intelligent control of an agricultural greenhouse based on fuzzy PID control. J. Environ. Eng. Sci. 2020, 15,
113–118. [CrossRef]
54. Riahi, J.; Vergura, S.; Mezghani, D.; Mami, A. Intelligent Control of the Microclimate of an Agricultural Greenhouse Powered by a
Supporting PV System. Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 1350. [CrossRef]
55. Mac, T.T.; Nguyen, T.-D.; Dang, H.-K.; Nguyen, D.-T.; Nguyen, X.-T. Intelligent agricultural robotic detection system for
greenhouse tomato leaf diseases using soft computing techniques and deep learning. Sci. Rep. 2024, 14, 23887. [CrossRef]
56. Sun, C.; Qiu, W. Feedback regulation system for spraying parameters based on online droplet mass deposit measurements. Int. J.
Agric. Biol. Eng. 2022, 15, 25–29. [CrossRef]
57. Chakravarty, S.P .; Roy, P . Quantitative feedback theory-based multi-variable robust control for soil quality improvement in a drip
irrigated field. J. Process Control 2023, 123, 76–86. [CrossRef]
58. Fu, J.; Chen, C.; Zhao, R.; Ren, L. Accurate Variable Control System for Boom Sprayer Based on Auxiliary Antidrift System. J.
Sens. 2020, 2020, 8037046. [CrossRef]
59. Tao, G. Multivariable adaptive control: A survey. Automatica 2014, 50, 2737–2764. [CrossRef]
60. Wang, L.; Wang, B. Construction of greenhouse environment temperature adaptive model based on parameter identification.
Comput. Electron. Agric. 2020, 174, 105477. [CrossRef]
61. Wang, L.; Zhang, H. An adaptive fuzzy hierarchical control for maintaining solar greenhouse temperature. Comput. Electron.
Agric. 2018, 155, 251–256. [CrossRef]
62. Boughamsa, M.; Ramdani, M. Adaptive fuzzy control strategy for greenhouse micro-climate. Int. J. Autom. Control 2018, 12,
108–125. [CrossRef]
63. Afram, A.; Janabi-Sharifi, F. Theory and applications of HVAC control systems—A review of model predictive control (MPC).
Build. Environ. 2014, 72, 343–355. [CrossRef]
64. Bersani, C.; Ouammi, A.; Sacile, R.; Zero, E. Model Predictive Control of Smart Greenhouses as the Path towards Near Zero
Energy Consumption. Energies 2020, 13, 3647. [CrossRef]
65. Achour, Y.; Ouammi, A.; Zejli, D.; Sayadi, S. Supervisory Model Predictive Control for Optimal Operation of a Greenhouse Indoor
Environment Coping With Food-Energy-Water Nexus. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 211562–211575. [CrossRef]
66. Bersani, C.; Fossa, M.; Priarone, A.; Sacile, R.; Zero, E. Model Predictive Control versus Traditional Relay Control in a High
Energy Efficiency Greenhouse. Energies 2021, 14, 3353. [CrossRef]
67. Lin, D.; Zhang, L.; Xia, X. Hierarchical model predictive control of Venlo-type greenhouse climate for improving energy efficiency
and reducing operating cost. J. Clean. Prod. 2020, 264, 121513. [CrossRef]
68. Mahmood, F.; Govindan, R.; Bermak, A.; Yang, D.; Al-Ansari, T. Data-driven robust model predictive control for greenhouse
temperature control and energy utilisation assessment. Appl. Energy 2023, 343, 121190. [CrossRef]
69. Caceres, G.B.; Ferramosca, A.; Gata, P .M.; Martin, M.P . Model Predictive Control Structures for Periodic ON-OFF Irrigation.IEEE
Access 2023, 11, 51985–51996. [CrossRef]


--- page 22 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 1388 22 of 23
70. Yu, Y.; Si, X.; Hu, C.; Zhang, J. A Review of Recurrent Neural Networks: LSTM Cells and Network Architectures. Neural Comput.
2019, 31, 1235–1270. [CrossRef]
71. Kamilaris, A.; Prenafeta-Boldu, F.X. A review of the use of convolutional neural networks in agriculture. J. Agric. Sci. 2018, 156,
312–322. [CrossRef]
72. Ojo, M.O.; Zahid, A. Deep Learning in Controlled Environment Agriculture: A Review of Recent Advancements, Challenges and
Prospects. Sensors 2022, 22, 7965. [CrossRef]
73. Castaneda-Miranda, A.; Castano, V .M. Smart frost control in greenhouses by neural networks models.Comput. Electron. Agric.
2017, 137, 102–114. [CrossRef]
74. Fourati, F. Multiple neural control of a greenhouse. Neurocomputing 2014, 139, 138–144. [CrossRef]
75. Jung, D.-H.; Lee, T.S.; Kim, K.; Park, S.H. A Deep Learning Model to Predict Evapotranspiration and Relative Humidity for
Moisture Control in Tomato Greenhouses. Agronomy 2022, 12, 2169. [CrossRef]
76. Liu, Y.; Li, D.; Wan, S.; Wang, F.; Dou, W.; Xu, X.; Li, S.; Ma, R.; Qi, L. A long short-term memory-based model for greenhouse
climate prediction. Int. J. Intell. Syst. 2022, 37, 135–151. [CrossRef]
77. Guesbaya, M.; Garcia-Manas, F.; Rodriguez, F.; Megherbi, H. A Soft Sensor to Estimate the Opening of Greenhouse Vents Based
on an LSTM-RNN Neural Network. Sensors 2023, 23, 1250. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
78. Wu, W.; Yao, B.; Huang, J.; Sun, S.; Zhang, F.; He, Z.; Tang, T.; Gao, R. Optimal temperature and humidity control for autonomous
control system based on PSO-BP neural networks. IET Control. Theory Appl. 2023, 17, 2097–2109. [CrossRef]
79. Belhaj Salah, L.; Fourati, F. A greenhouse modeling and control using deep neural networks.Appl. Artif. Intell. 2021, 35, 1905–1929.
[CrossRef]
80. Cevallos, G.; Herrera, M.; Jaimez, R.; Aboukheir, H.; Camacho, O. A Practical Hybrid Control Approach for a Greenhouse
Microclimate: A Hardware-in-the-Loop Implementation. Agriculture 2022, 12, 1916. [CrossRef]
81. Zhang, L.; Shen, Y. Intelligent measurement and control system of greenhouse environment based on the of hybrid incremental
PID control. Basic Clin. Pharmacol. T oxicol. 2019, 125, 166–167.
82. Castaneda-Miranda, A.; Castano-Meneses, V .M. Smart frost measurement for anti-disaster intelligent control in greenhouses via
embedding IoT and hybrid AI methods. Measurement 2020, 164, 108043. [CrossRef]
83. Ding, J.-T.; Tu, H.-Y.; Zang, Z.-L.; Huang, M.; Zhou, S.-J. Precise control and prediction of the greenhouse growth environment of
Dendrobium candidum. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2018, 151, 453–459. [CrossRef]
84. Mohamed, S.; Hameed, I.A. A GA-Based Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Controller for Greenhouse Climate Control System. Alex. Eng. J.
2018, 57, 773–779. [CrossRef]
85. Montoya, A.P .; Guzman, J.L.; Rodriguez, F.; Sanchez-Molina, J.A. A hybrid-controlled approach for maintaining nocturnal
greenhouse temperature: Simulation study. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2016, 123, 116–124. [CrossRef]
86. Yan, H.; Acquah, S.J.; Zhang, J.; Wang, G.; Zhang, C.; Darko, R.O. Overview of modelling techniques for greenhouse microclimate
environment and evapotranspiration. Int. J. Agric. Biol. Eng. 2021, 14, 1–8. [CrossRef]
87. Xu, D.; Ren, L.; Zhang, X. Predicting Multidimensional Environmental Factor Trends in Greenhouse Microclimates Using a
Hybrid Ensemble Approach. J. Sens. 2023, 2023, 6486940. [CrossRef]
88. Bouhoun Ali, H.; Bournet, P .-E.; Cannavo, P .; Chantoiseau, E. Development of a CFD crop submodel for simulating microclimate
and transpiration of ornamental plants grown in a greenhouse under water restriction. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2018, 149, 26–40.
[CrossRef]
89. Sciuto, G.L.; Cammarata, G.; Capizzi, G.; Coco, S. Numerical simulation of a typical bioclimate greenhouse in winter on cloudy
days. In Proceedings of the 2018 International Symposium on Power Electronics, Electrical Drives, Automation and Motion,
SPEEDAM, Amalfi, Italy, 20–22 June 2018; pp. 779–785.
90. Wang, H.; Li, L.; Wu, Y.; Meng, F.; Wang, H.; Sigrimis, N.A. Recurrent Neural Network Model for Prediction of Microclimate in
Solar Greenhouse. In Proceedings of the 6th International-Federation-of-Automatic-Control (IFAC) Conference on Bio-Robotics
(BIOROBOTICS), Beijing, China, 13–15 July 2018; pp. 790–795.
91. Villagran, E.A.; Baeza Romero, E.J.; Bojaca, C.R. Transient CFD analysis of the natural ventilation of three types of greenhouses
used for agricultural production in a tropical mountain climate. Biosyst. Eng. 2019, 188, 288–304. [CrossRef]
92. Pakari, A.; Ghani, S. Airflow assessment in a naturally ventilated greenhouse equipped with wind towers: Numerical simulation
and wind tunnel experiments. Energy Build. 2019, 199, 1–11. [CrossRef]
93. Ma, D.; Carpenter, N.; Maki, H.; Rehman, T.U.; Tuinstra, M.R.; Jin, J. Greenhouse environment modeling and simulation for
microclimate control. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2019, 162, 134–142. [CrossRef]
94. Saberian, A.; Sajadiye, S.M. The effect of dynamic solar heat load on the greenhouse microclimate using CFD simulation. Renew.
Energy 2019, 138, 722–737. [CrossRef]
95. Yau, J.; Ji, J.; Wang, H.; Eniola, O.; Ibitoye, F.P . Modeling of the Internal Temperature for an Energy Saving Chinese Solar
Greenhouse. Eng. T echnol. Appl. Sci. Res. 2020, 10, 6276–6281. [CrossRef]


--- page 23 ---
Sensors 2025, 25, 1388 23 of 23
96. Ben Ali, R.; Bouadila, S.; Mami, A. Experimental validation of the dynamic thermal behavior of two types of agricultural
greenhouses in the Mediterranean context. Renew. Energy 2020, 147, 118–129. [CrossRef]
97. Jung, D.-H.; Kim, H.S.; Jhin, C.; Kim, H.-J.; Park, S.H. Time-serial analysis of deep neural network models for prediction of
climatic conditions inside a greenhouse. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2020, 173, 105402. [CrossRef]
98. Ernesto Aguilar-Rodriguez, C.; Flores-Velazquez, J.; Ojeda-Bustamante, W.; Rojano, F.; Iniguez-Covarrubias, M. Valuation of the
Energy Performance of a Greenhouse with an Electric Heater Using Numerical Simulations. Processes 2020, 8, 600. [CrossRef]
99. Gharghory, S.M. Deep Network based on Long Short-Term Memory for Time Series Prediction of Microclimate Data inside the
Greenhouse. Int. J. Comput. Intell. Appl. 2020, 19, 2050013. [CrossRef]
100. Chalill, S.M.; Chowdhury, S.; Karthikeyan, R. Prediction of Key Crop Growth Parameters in a Commercial Greenhouse Using
CFD Simulation and Experimental Verification in a Pilot Study.Agriculture 2021, 11, 658. [CrossRef]
101. Liu, R.; Yuan, S.; Han, L. Evaluation and Analysis on the Temperature Prediction Model for Bailing Mushroom in Jizhou, Tianjin.
Agriculture 2022, 12, 2044. [CrossRef]
102. Zhao, X.; Han, Y.; Lewlomphaisarl, U.; Wang, H.; Hua, J.; Wang, X.; Kang, M. Parallel Control of Greenhouse Climate With a
Transferable Prediction Model. IEEE J. Radio Freq. Identif. 2022, 6, 857–861. [CrossRef]
103. Yang, Y.; Gao, P .; Sun, Z.; Wang, H.; Lu, M.; Liu, Y.; Hu, J. Multistep ahead prediction of temperature and humidity in solar
greenhouse based on FAM-LSTM model. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2023, 213, 108261. [CrossRef]
104. Habashi, W.G. A Path to Enabling a Wider Use of Controlled-Accuracy 3D CFD in Industry and Academia.Int. J. Unconv. Comput.
2023, 18, 15–48.
105. Yang, Y.; Gao, P .; Sun, Z.; Wang, H.; Lu, M.; Liu, Y.; Hu, J. Optimizing the 3D Distributed Climate inside Greenhouses Using
Multi-Objective Optimization Algorithms and Computer Fluid Dynamics. Energies 2019, 12, 2873. [CrossRef]
106. Katzin, D.; van Mourik, S.; Kempkes, F.; van Henten, E.J. GreenLight—An open source model for greenhouses with supplemental
lighting: Evaluation of heat requirements under LED and HPS lamps. Biosyst. Eng. 2020, 194, 61–81. [CrossRef]
107. Huang, J.; Sedano, F.; Huang, Y.; Ma, H.; Li, X.; Liang, S.; Tian, L.; Zhang, X.; Fan, J.; Wu, W. Assimilating a synthetic Kalman filter
leaf area index series into the WOFOST model to improve regional winter wheat yield estimation. Agric. For. Meteorol. 2016, 216,
188–202. [CrossRef]
108. Ma, H.; Malone, R.W.; Jiang, T.; Yao, N.; Chen, S.; Song, L.; Feng, H.; Yu, Q.; He, J. Estimating crop genetic parameters for DSSAT
with modified PEST software. Eur. J. Agron. 2020, 115, 126017. [CrossRef]
109. Boote, K.J.; Seepaul, R.; Mulvaney, M.J.; Hagan, A.K.; Bashyal, M.; George, S.; Small, I.; Wright, D.L. Adapting the CROPGRO
model to simulate growth and production of Brassica carinata, a bio-fuel crop. Glob. Chang. Biol. Bioenergy 2021, 13, 1134–1148.
[CrossRef]
110. Wu, A.; Song, Y.; van Oosterom, E.J.; Hammer, G.L. Connecting Biochemical Photosynthesis Models with Crop Models to Support
Crop Improvement. Front. Plant Sci. 2016, 7, 1518. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
111. Graefe, J.; Yu, W.; Koerner, O. A Photosynthetic Light Acclimation Model Accounting for the Effects of Leaf Age, Chlorophyll
Content, and Intra-Leaf Radiation Transfer. Front. Plant Sci. 2022, 13, 889709. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
112. Nomura, K.; Yasutake, D.; Kaneko, T.; Iwao, T.; Okayasu, T.; Ozaki, Y.; Mori, M.; Kitano, M. Long-term estimation of the canopy
photosynthesis of a leafy vegetable based on greenhouse climate conditions and nadir photographs. Sci. Hortic. 2021, 289, 110433.
[CrossRef]
113. Chen, N.; Li, X.; Shi, H.; Hu, Q.; Zhang, Y.; Sun, Y.; Song, F. Simulation of maize crop growth using an improved crop model
considering the disintegrated area of biodegradable film. Field Crops Res. 2021, 272, 108270. [CrossRef]
114. Shirley, R.; Pope, E.; Bartlett, M.; Oliver, S.; Quadrianto, N.; Hurley, P .; Duivenvoorden, S.; Rooney, P .; Barrett, A.B.; Kent, C.; et al.
An empirical, Bayesian approach to modelling crop yield: Maize in USA. Environ. Res. Commun. 2020, 2, 025002. [CrossRef]
115. Ntakos, G.; Prikaziuk, E.; ten Den, T.; Reidsma, P .; Vilfan, N.; van der Wal, T.; van der Tol, C. Coupled WOFOST and SCOPE
model for remote sensing-based crop growth simulations. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2024, 225, 109238. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.